2 3 16 UNIVERSITEITSBIBLIOTHEEK GENT 111er. uuiuuuuuus aiu DEtEEdS COOgle SEtEOS GOOgle 1 3 a etE 4 THADDTD LIBRARY INSTITUTED BY THE GOVERNMENT. MANUAL DE CULTURE MARAICHÈRE. (2nd PART.) 266- - MRRUXELLES. Rue de la Montagne, n° 51. 1833 H. TARLIER, editeur. 2 re R- 3 S A 3 2 "Coogle NIVERSITEITSBIBLIOTHEEK GENT Illlllmimmaimla. 000000444297 INSTITUTED BY THE GOCVERNENT. MANUAL DE CULTURE MARAICHÈRE. PRACTICAL PART. SEtEEdS COOgle 1..7731 7~~ . ~~.~. ~ .21:.-a - Imprimcrie de G. Stapleaux. BEtEEdS Coogle CULTURE MARAICHERE PARTIE THÉORIQUE. TAA JULIEN DEET, PROTESSEUR D'AGRICULTURE A BAUXELLES, PARTIE PRATIQUE. BY RODIGAS, AGRICULTURAL TEACHER AT L'ÉCOLE NORMALE DE LIERRE. WORKS AWARDED A PRIZE IN THE GOVERNMENT COMPETITION. TONE DEUXIEE. BRUSSELS. AU BUREAU DE LA BIBLIOTHÉQUE RURALE RUE VE LA XONTAENX, N° 51. 1853 BEtEde GOogle .. 1" ..". t. " 2. 1 .. ... Sit-d Goôgle CULTURE MARAICHÈRE. CHAPTER ONE. GENERAL NOTIONS. Before moving on to the special cultivation of edible plants in our gardens, we believe it will be useful to give a few general indications concerning the quality of soil and fertilizers, and the various methods of operation involved in the science we are about to deal with. SETTING UP A MARKET GARDEN; CHOICE OF LAND. When the gardener has a certain amount of land at his disposal and can choose a site to establish his garden, he will pay less attention to the quality of the soil surface than to the depth of the plant layer. Let him observe, then, that the land is very suitable for market gardening if it is made up of a layer of clean soil, one CULTURE MARAICHÈRE. 2. a meter deep, and if at the same time this layer rests on a subsoil of sand: well-tended soil of this nature promises very fine produce. The same is not true when the topsoil is sandy, not very thick and resting on a loamy subsoil: in this case, if the garden is in a low-lying area and water cannot easily run off through drainage ditches, it is certain that the very spring-like cultivation of vegetables will be impracticable; water stagnates on the subsoil; the topsoil is full of moisture in winter and spring; it is cold and everything is late. The garden also needs to be well ventilated, completely uncovered and sheltered, if possible, from the cold northerly winds by wooden curtains or groves. Low-lying land, if not damp, is more advantageous than arid, mountainous terrain. An essential point not to be lost sight of is the means of water supply to which the crop very often owes its prosperity; for the best soils, those that give easy passage to water, need it during the heat. The proximity of a stream is such an advantage that it can become a determining factor in the choice of land. In the absence of running water, a reservoir set up, if possible, in the middle of the garden, can sometimes make up for it. When building such a reservoir, it's a good idea to find out how deep the water is underground, which can easily be discovered by measuring the water level in the nearest wells. In large gardens, water is distributed by pipes laid under the paths and leading to several reservoirs. If, as is often the case, you are obliged to accept ready-made layouts, gardens already created in advance, all you have to do is divide up the land and adapt it as best you can to the different crops. Division. - When it comes to distribution, whether you're dealing with a previously cultivated site or a brand-new garden, squares and straight, parallel beds should take precedence. The various operations can always be carried out with the greatest ease and promptness. The extent of the large divisions can be arbitrary; however, these squares should be laid out in such a way as to facilitate services as much as possible. Planks should be 1.33 m wide; wider planks make weeding and hoeing inconvenient; a man of average height should be able to reach the middle of the planks without having to walk on them. The narrow paths separating the beds should be level with the beds in dry, sandy soils, whereas they should be dug in wet, clayey soils. Exposure. - The exposure of the garden to the sun must be taken into serious consideration: land facing east or between east and south, with a gentle slope towards one of these sides, is to be preferred to any other for both exposure and slope. Ruts. - Ripping should only be carried out when the topsoil is sandy and shallow, and if it is advantageous to mix it with the underlying clay layer, and vice versa, or when the surface of the land has been depleted by previous cultivation. It's worth noting that plants almost always thrive less in the first and second years after two- to three-foot-deep trenching, but that all plants in general, and root vegetables in particular, benefit considerably thereafter; being able to penetrate deeper into the soil, they produce infinitely better and are more beautiful. One disadvantage of this practice is that it gives rise to a lot of weeds: seeds buried deep in the earth retain their germinative capacity for many years, and soon develop as soon as they come into contact with atmospheric agents. To break up a plot of land, we usually proceed as follows: open a trench of indeterminate length, 1 metre wide and Om,60 to 0m,70 deep or thereabouts; deposit the soil emerging from it at the other end of the plot, where the work is to end; then carry the soil from a second layer to the place of the first, and so on. In order to proceed more rationally when breaking up the soil, an operation which not only entails the cost of difficult and always costly work, but also a loss of produce in the first few years, we recommend breaking up the soil gradually, year by year, by about ten centimetres lower than previously, so that after five or six years the desired depth and movement of soil have been reached. In this way, labor costs are insignificant, and yields, instead of decreasing in the early years, are actually increased. However, the experienced grower knows perfectly well that, in principle, any deeply broken ground requires a lot of fertilizer. This fact can be explained by what happens during plant nutrition. As the plant layer formed by the decomposition of organic animal or vegetable substances is displaced, the land now on the surface is sterile; it must have been subjected for a long time to the influences of the atmospheric air and must have received new fertilizers before plants can find abundant nourishment there. It is for these reasons that we recommend, as stated above, to break up the soil gradually, from year to year. Ploughing. - The ploughing that is commonly carried out in the vegetable garden by "béchage" does not take place all year round, so we first draw attention to autumn ploughing: this is intended to purify the soil, and make it loose and fertile. Any land that is not planted with vegetables in winter should therefore be ploughed or, what we prefer, ridged. Experience shows that ploughing before winter improves the soil, and that frosts have the greatest effect on ploughed land. After prolonged, bitter cold, the soil undergoes a kind of calcination that turns it to dust, as happens to certain metals which, by decomposing part of the atmospheric air, appropriate its oxygen, oxidize and disintegrate. The same ameliorating effects can occur during the summer: subjected to the repeated action of the sun's cha1. leur, a chalky soil calcines and crumbles to dust. Its surface, now soft and loose, offers easy access to the deeper penetration of atmospheric gases essential to the decomposition of fertilizing principles which, having become soluble in water, are now absorbed by the stomata or inhalant mouths found at the ends of plant roots. So, as we can see, ploughing is a means of fertilizing the soil that produces astonishing effects; moreover, it is equally suited to sandy and clayey soils. As for the process of ridging a plot of land, it's the easiest of all: you mark out paths about Om.40 wide with a chalk line, and spade them to the same depth, placing one half on the ridge to the left, and the other half on the ridge to the right. This earth, cut in slices or spaded to a thickness of about one decimeter, will cover the planks everywhere, which are about 1.33 m wide. It will not be broken or harrowed; all the clods will be next to each other or partially superimposed, like tiles on a roof. The greater the surface area of these clods, the more the soil is subjected to the beneficial influences of atmospheric gases charged with the emanations that provide the roots with nourishment and give the soil fertility. Ploughing, or "béchage" as it is known, consists of opening a gauge with the spade, and bringing the soil to the corner of the square where the ploughing is to end; it is then brought back to close the last ray. The first gauge is filled by digging the second, and so on. The gardener must pay close attention to this operation, because the success or failure of the harvest often depends on the good or bad execution of the licking: it is not on the surface of the soil that the clods must be broken, but in the gauge itself; the shovelfuls will not be more than ten centimetres thick, and the gardener, instead of depositing them by turning them over, must break them by shaking them on the spade. Some careless workers walk, for their own convenience, while spading, even in the gauges: it's a vicious routine. The bottom of the shelves sink and settle, and the vegetation suffers. Stubborn, clayey soils can always be ploughed in dry weather; if, on the other hand, you shape them while they are wet, you render them impervious to atmospheric agents and sterile for a long time to come. Levelling and straightening planks. - Since levelling is simply a shaping operation consisting of filling and clearing, according to geometric measurements, we don't think it's worth dwelling on it for long. The same applies to planking, which we explain in Special Crops. So, when the ploughing is finished, and the boards have been given their width by the paths that frame them, all that remains is to level them with the rake to make them suitable for planting or seeding. First and foremost, we feel we must review the various fertilizers used in gardening, which we will divide into two classes: animal fertilizers and plant fertilizers. PQ Sludge. - Among animal fertilizers, we'll start with slurry, the manure that comes from cesspools, also known as Flemish funtier, human manure, which should be appreciated by every good grower and gardener. This manure can be applied to the cultivation of all vegetable plants in general, as we shall see later, and activates vegetation to a very high degree. In sandy soils, as experience has shown, it is very difficult to produce good pea, bean and cabbage crops without the use of this eminently fertilizing substance. Suitably distributed in cultivation, the excremental parts of man can provide a measure of a country's agricultural development. Foreigners like to point to Flanders as a very advanced country in terms of cultivation, and we know what a prodigious quantity of sludge is used there every year. The Chinese are cited as the first people on earth in terms of knowledge of cultivation; and the Chinese value this precious fertilizer so highly that they collect it in vases on public roads and deposit it at the foot of plants. As with all other animal fertilizers, the value of human fertilizer is relative to the nature of the food; it will be all the more energetic the more human consumption consists of high-nitrogen foods, such as meats. It is also on the basis of differences in diet that chemical analyses, in both humans and animals, show such a wide range of results for individuals of the same species, with regard to their excreta. Today, thanks to advances in farming, these substances are used not only in Belgium, but also in Germany, France, Italy, England and Holland. As sludge cannot be used on a daily basis, it must be stored in masonry tanks; if possible, an opening should be left on the north side to allow atmospheric air to enter and accelerate fermentation. These tanks are proportionate to the size of the farm, and can range from 6 to 30 cubic meters. Flemish manure should not be used for cultivation until it has fermented for a few months. It can be used very advantageously in compost and for special crops, as we will often mention in this treatise. Poudrette. - Poudrette is the name given to human fecal matter that has been dried for use. To prepare this fertilizer, the solid matter is mixed with clay after the urine has been drained, then dried in the sun and stored. This method of processing fertilizer is highly unsound: firstly, all the urine, so rich in urate and ammonia phosphate, is lost; as we can see, it's a waste of this excellent fertilizer. This process could therefore be rejected. Although it has lost a large part of its fertilizing properties, poudrette is still a very active fertilizer, but not as long-lasting as sludge. Its action on cereals has been observed to diminish sharply, if not cease, at the time of fruiting. Animalized black. - In order to disinfect human feces, we have found a way to incorporate them intimately with charcoal. The disinfectant properties of charcoal have long been known, but a cheaper alternative had to be found, and this has now been discovered: humus-rich earth, burnt in closed vessels. Humus, like all vegetable substances, becomes carbonaceous and absorbent after combustion. By mixing it with sludge, ammoniacal gases condense in it; the fertilizer remains active for longer, and plants find more lasting nourishment. The richest humus-rich soils are best suited to making animalized black, such as marsh soil, which sometimes contains 50% plant debris. To fix the ammonia hydrosulfate found in cesspools, which produces the foul odor that is so unpleasant, chemistry has provided us with several substances that combine with this gas. Iron sulfate, dissolved in water and mixed with this manure, forms ammonia hydrosulfate, a fixed, odorless salt, while iron oxide precipitates out. Animal black. - Animal black should not be confused with animal black, more properly known as refinery residue black. Sugar refiners purify syrups using blood and animal charcoal, also known as ivory black, obtained by burning bones (lime phosphate) in closed vessels. This residue is a highly active fertilizer, as is easy to understand, since lime phosphate, which is in itself a very good fertilizer, is mixed with blood, a very nitrogenous substance. Sheepfold manure. - This manure is very active and considered a hot fertilizer. This ancient and traditional qualification is nothing if not vague. Since the progress of chemistry, the strength and goodness of fertilizers have been determined according to the more or less nitrogen they contain. Among horned beasts, sheep and goats produce the most nitrogenous manures; it follows that this manure is one of the most fertilizing; furthermore, its physical consistency means that it does not ferment easily, and, in this respect, ammonia losses are less to be feared than in stable manure. Woollen manure is especially suited to cold, clay soils that need a fertilizer that doesn't take too long to work; this is precisely the case with nitrogen-dominant fertilizers, which work quickly and are especially suited to plants that grow quickly: all crucifers benefit considerably from them; hemp grows very strongly from them; tobacco develops extraordinarily well from them. It is also extremely useful in composting. Its action hardly lasts beyond the first year; this characteristic is common to all highly nitrogenous fertilizers. Stable manure. - This is the name given to manure from horses, donkeys and mules. The droppings of these animals, mixed with vegetable substances, undergo various degrees of decomposition through fermentation, making them more or less suitable as plant food. This type of manure is generally used for all crops; it is, so to speak, the only one used for mushroom cultivation, and is eminently suitable for forced cultivation beds. What makes it especially valuable for this type of cultivation is the ease with which its fermentation can be 7 stopped or activated, depending on the need for artificial heat. All you have to do is keep it dry or damp. To keep it in a suitable state of dryness, we keep it in sheds or even in a dry, completely uncovered place: litter or long manure is used for this purpose. It must not be too compressed. You should also avoid rebuilding the piles in order to moderate the heat, which will only reproduce more actively. When it's time to use it, all you have to do is wet it and compress it hard enough: it will ferment and heat up within three days. It's a popular misconception that stable manure is too hot for sandy soils: it's suitable for all soils, but it decomposes more quickly, so its fertilizing power is used up more quickly in such soils. When destined for gardens or fields, it's a good idea to mix it with cow or pig manure, and often wet it with liquid manure; this prevents fermentation and prevents it from burning. Stable manure. - Although it doesn't work as quickly as stable manure, horned-animal manure is more durable for our gardens, and its virtue is felt for a long time. It produces a lot of humus, is a powerful food for plants, and is suitable for all plants and all soils. It makes clay soils soft and loose, and gives consistency to light, sandy soils. Note that it is even better and more durable if it comes from fattening animals; animals fed on straw only produce manure of lesser value. culture liquid fertilizer, which comes from piles of stable manure. It is highly advantageous for vegetable plants, used either pure or mixed with other substances. The horticulturist uses it very advantageously when decomposing a large mass of plant matter: it's an effective way of obtaining an ample supply of potting soil, which market gardening can hardly do without. Pig manure. - Contrary to popular belief, pig manure is more active than horse or cow manure. Pigs are omnivores: they feed not only on vegetable substances such as potatoes and cereals, but also on animal substances such as meat and milk. This being the case, it must necessarily produce a more nitrogenous fertilizer: chemical analysis confirms this. Guano. - Guano is the name given to the droppings of the seabirds that inhabit the coasts of Chile, Peru and Colombia. These birds are found in excessively large flocks in a few small fles, where they have been depositing their droppings for a long series of years. It is this fertilizer that today makes a fairly considerable article of trade; but since guano was found to be mixed with less energetic substances, either by fraud or accident, European trade has become wary of it. Columbine. - Pigeon droppings, one of the most active fertilizers among those derived from poultry, are even more effective than chicken droppings, which already have a great fertilizing power, as we shall see in the cultivation of 2. * onions. Pigeon pellets contain a greater quantity of nitrogen than hen droppings, which in turn contain a greater quantity than the droppings of other animals. Pigeon pellets must be kept dry to be used at the right time. Spread among young leguminous plants, carrots, onions, cauliflower, beans and parsnips, it produces astonishing effects; but its use requires a great deal of caution, and the layer spread must be far from covering the soil. Cucurbits benefit extraordinarily from the use of these fertilizers; diluted in water, they can be used for watering once or twice a year; it's after similar waterings that we've seen ornamental plants, camellias and fuchsias, flourish, so to speak. PLANT FERTILIZERS. As they decompose, plants form fertilizers that differ from animal fertilizers not so much in their constituent principles as in their apparent form. They contain oxygen, hydrogen, carbon and, in some cases, even nitrogen; as with animals, they also contain most mineral substances and salts. It follows that plant manure is a great resource for cultivation. This is why marshes, where the detritus of plant matter has built up layers of humus, are so fertile that the most luxurious crops can be grown there for ten or fifteen years, without the need for further amendment. Crops mowed green and buried always return more fertilizer to the soil than they take away. A soil where grasses grow, die and reproduce, instead of becoming thinner, becomes fatter: if these same grasses were continually removed from this soil, without restoring the extracted principles, it would become poor and sterile. It is on this theory that the various crop rotations are based, and hence all cultivation: giving back to the soil what the harvests have taken away from it. Farmers and agronomists can considerably enrich their land with manure, if they are careful enough to collect the residues of vegetables, flowers, weeds from weeding, leaves from trees, plants that grow on the banks of water, lawns, mosses, ferns, etc., all mixed with animal substances. All this mixed with animal substances makes excellent compost, as we shall see when growing asparagus, pineapples and other plants. Amendments. - Amendments are inorganic or mineral substances such as clay, sand, marl and lime, which change the physical constitution of the soil. Clay makes soil that is too light more consistent; sand loosens clay soil that is too compact; marl, whose use was already known to the ancient Celts, makes soil more porous; it is composed of clay, sand and lime; lime makes sandy soil more consistent, and soil that is too compact less tenacious. However, the action of these bodies is not purely mechanical: they unite with the acids contained in the earth and air, and form salts that are more or less neutral, more or less soluble in water, and which, carried into plant tissues by capillary vessels, can immediately serve to nourish them. Ashes, soot and gypsum are usually included among soil improvers, although in the strictest sense these compound substances are merely fertilizers that simultaneously act mechanically on the nature of the soil. Potting soil. - Potting soil is made up of the remains of plant substances that have passed through the various stages of fermentation. This plant detritus, which necessarily varies according to the plants from which it comes, contributes greatly to loosening the soil, making it permeable to carbonic acid gas, atmospheric air and humidity, all indispensable conditions for beautiful, productive vegetation. Decomposed plant matter becomes humus, which plays a chemical role in plant growth by releasing carbonic acid and nitrogen principles to the roots. SEEDING. Seed selection. - Only the best seeds from the best species will ever be harvested: those from sickly or bastardised individuals, or those collected in soil that is too thin or too smoky, produce stunted, sickly plants. The condition of seeds is usually judged by inspection; the water test is also of some help: bad seeds float to the surface, while good ones sink to the bottom. But the surest way is to count a hundred or so seeds taken at random from those you wish to use: sow them in a small terrine, cover them and maintain the humidity. Placed in a warm apartment, or better still in the greenhouse, or on a bed if it's cold, the terrine gives a measure of the seed's validity; all you have to do is see how many seeds out of a hundred have germinated. Sowing methods. - Although most seeds are placed in the ground around springtime, there are no fixed times for seeding. They are sown according to the phases of life the plants go through, according to the climate to which they belong, and even according to their intended use. Thus, to prolong the use of certain vegetables, they are sown several times during the year. We are no longer in the days when people consulted the course of the moon before sowing, and believed in its influence on vegetation. However, we don't blame the inhabitants of our countryside for their traditional habit of sowing a particular plant on a particular saint's day. This often means that they conform in some way to the appropriate times for sowing, which are favorable to the success of the operation, times that their agricultural occupations would sometimes cause them to forget. It would be difficult to give a general indication of the time required for seeds to germinate, and the time they need to reach full development: we will refer to each crop in particular. In different soils, the same seeds will be sown earlier or later; they will be entrusted to cold, damp clay soil later than to warm, sandy soil. When the soil is too wet, it's best to delay sowing by a few days; it's also wise to consult the barometer, as heavy rain immediately after sowing will 2. compromise the harvest. As for the thickness of the layer to cover the seeds, there's a fairly safe rule of thumb: the finer the seeds, the less they should be covered, so that those the size of a pinhead and below, such as celery, parsley, purslane, lettuce and a host of others, are no more than 9n.02 deep; some very small seeds are content and even better off not being covered: a wetting with the apple watering can fixes them sufficiently. Seedlings require well-prepared, soft, loose and sometimes even terra-cotta soil. They require constant, well-maintained humidity during their young life. It is often necessary to shelter seeds during germination with moss, which is removed as soon as the young plant appears. Sowing is divided into broadcast sowing and sowing in rays or rows. Broadcast sowing involves grasping a handful of seeds between the fingers, and spreading them over the soil as the arm is rotated. Fine seeds are grasped between thumb and forefinger; less fine seeds, such as carrot or onion seeds, are grasped between thumb, forefinger and middle finger: in this way, they are more evenly distributed. For sowing in rows, we draw deep radii, spaced according to what we want to sow. For this purpose, we have had a wooden rake made to the ordinary width of boards, or 1m,35; it has two sets of tines; in one the tines are at Om,10, this is intended for sowing carrots, onions, etc.; in the other, they are at 0m, 13, it is used for sowing parsnips, salsify, scorzonera. The teeth are triangular and pointed; they are 0m,025 thick and Om,09 long. To make it easier to hold the rake along the length of the boards, and to ensure that the rays are straight and parallel, a slat is fixed along the edge of the board with three pegs, against which the first tooth of the rake is pressed as it is drawn. This is how we have successfully sown the plants we have just named, as well as spinach, coffee chicory and others. Seeds are easily covered, taking care to follow the direction of the rows. Sowing in rows is very advantageous, especially in soils where hoeing and weeding must be frequent. Transplanting. - This operation is necessary for all plants that cannot be sown in situ: it consists in lifting the young plants when they have four or six leaves, and planting them in a nursery or in situ. Many plants, such as lettuces, endives and beets, cannot be transplanted in the nursery. Others are very difficult to transplant, such as cabbages, especially red, white and Savoy cabbages. Without transplanting in the nursery, their stems acquire a length that is not only unpleasant to the eye, but also detrimental to their beauty. The root hairs of transplanted plants develop better, and they are more resistant to frost. During transplanting, care must be taken not to trample the roots on themselves, to shorten those that are too long, and to firm the soil by the pressure of the planter without overloading it. It's a good idea to transplant the most delicate and tender plants in the evening, or to cover them until they recover, during bright sunshine; plants that need it are transplanted in the shade. You'll find these details in the special crops section. Counterplants. - To save time, and with the aim of extracting the greatest amount of produce from the soil, the gardener doesn't always wait until the land is empty before dedicating it to another vegetable crop; he often starts cultivating another plant when the first has reached the middle or three quarters of its vegetation; this operation is called counter-planting. This is how market gardeners in Paris counter-plant celeriac or pear-cardea in a chicory bed, chicory in lettuces, tomatoes in romaine, lettuces and romaine in cauliflower, cauliflower in escarole, etc. Interplanting. - Interplanting is the name given to the method of cultivating, between plants specially intended for a plot of land, other plants which, without harming the first, produce a double harvest, so to speak. This is how beets and green cabbage are planted between rows of beans, at the same time as or a few days after the latter; lettuces are planted between cabbages, and cabbages between broad beans, and so on. It's easy to see how these well-made counter-plantings and inter-plantings can considerably increase the year's harvests. We therefore call serious attention to these methods of horticultural cultivation. Topdressing. - Sprinkled on the soil among young plants, potting soil activates their growth and develops their root system; it prevents them from drying out and maintains the porosity of the soil. This operation is known as terreautage. In market gardening, compost or mixtures of decomposed animal and vegetable substances are more commonly referred to as terreau. They can be prepared in a variety of ways, so to speak, for the crops for which they are needed. Cowshed litter with lots of cow dung, stirred several times during the year; leaves packed in a mixture with sludge, stirred several times during the same interval; Jauffret fertilizer or lime mixed with fresh or dried plants, packed and sprinkled with an alkaline solution or with washing water, turned over several times during the year; butcher's blood mixed with lime and soft earth; tannin, blood, lime and sand, treated as above; consumed manure from broken layers used for forced cultivation; colombina, hen droppings and others offer so many composts that can all be very usefully applied to topdressing, as we shall often see in the course of this treatise. Mulching. - This operation, one of the most useful for vegetable growing, is too little practised in Belgium. Easy to carry out, it consists of spreading litter on the surface of the soil, between transplanted or established plants. Its effects on vegetation are the same as those of topdressing; however, mulch cannot be applied to seedlings that have not yet been transplanted. The results of mulching are: to keep the soil fresh, to prevent water from evaporating too quickly during watering, to preserve the porosity of the soil so that water and air can penetrate it more easily; and finally, through the gradual decomposition of litter, mulch provides plants with continuous food that watering and rainfall carry to their roots. It also prevents an unfortunate accident in low plants such as strawberries, cabbage and romaine. Driving rain causes soil particles to splash onto the underside of leaves, clogging their pores and interrupting, if not totally then at least partially, one of the most important physiological functions - the absorption of moisture and gaseous fluids. In addition to these various results, the cleanliness that mulching produces in plants and especially in strawberry fruits, as we shall see later, must also be taken into account. The thickness to be given to the mulch layer is indeterminate; however, we can say that a layer of short manure or litter of Om,08 to 0m,10 is reduced by settling to a thickness of Om, 02 or Om,03. Mulching is carried out after straightening the beds, before or after planting. Tanning. - Here we recommend the use of a material which we have used successfully for a number of years, which would otherwise be improperly called mulching, and which we propose to call tanning. This consists in spreading a layer of tannin, Om,04 or Om,08 thick, over the beds after planting. This material can be used as it comes out of the tanners' vats; and without harming the most delicate plants in the least, it has the precious property of keeping snails away. In contact with air and humidity, tannin decomposes, becomes humus, and is incorporated into the soil by hoeing. Watering. - In all crops, watering is one of the most useful operations. Water carries the salts it dissolves to the roots of plants, and at the same time carries all the nutrients in fertilizers: without water, vegetation is impossible. Apply the most effective fertilizers to plants in a dry state; you won't get any results. Who hasn't seen plants wither and suffer, even on the best soils, on days of scorching heat? Who hasn't seen their corollas and leaves bend sadly? Since their roots can't pump out as much juice as the pores of their leaves have to give up through evaporation, a state of suffering must necessarily permeate their entire organization; and although the beneficial dew in the evening refreshes and revives plants whose existence is threatened, this dew is far from sufficient to continue providing them with the nourishment from which they must constantly draw their strength. This is why watering replaces rainfall, and gives plants strength and health through a generous distribution of water. While we have recently seen some fine results from irrigation in Belgium, France's horticultural industry has for some time now been making remarkable progress with various watering systems. It's easy to believe that a 50-acre marsh in Paris receives up to 100,000 liters of water a day in summer. We don't really know why market gardening in our country has so far been so stingy when it comes to watering, whereas it offers so many resources. In hot weather, evening watering is best: by then, the coolness has already warmed the soil and plants, and water cannot cause the temperature contrast that would occur during the day. In spring and autumn, when the nights are already cool, water only in the morning, and observe the same rule for plants on beds, under frames, in tarpaulins and in greenhouses. No plant, with the exception of strawberries, likes to be watered in bright sunlight. For the same reason, we must avoid watering with icy well water, which, if left cold on the plant, causes a kind of plant catarrh, if I may put it this way: this water tightens the pores of the plant due to its lack of temperature balance, and to the lime sub-carbonate it dissolves. If you don't have a spring or a water source, and you have to use well water, you should pour it into a reservoir to bring it into equilibrium with the air temperature, and at the same time allow the carbonic acid gas to be released, and the lime to precipitate. Untimely watering is often harmful to melons and lettuces, whereas when the time is right, it is very beneficial. It's best to water around the stems and roots. In our gardens, watering is commonly carried out using a watering can with a head pierced with fine holes: the water should always be poured over the plants, very evenly, and fall in small showers; the water should not be allowed to pool or stagnate on the soil; it should be allowed to soak in as it is poured. Weeding. - Weeding consists in removing weeds that live on fertilizer, at the expense of the cultivated plants among which they are found. In vegetable gardens, this operation is usually carried out by hand, by uprooting: if it were very dry, the soil would have to be moistened in the evening, so that work could begin the next day. Weeds can also be removed by hoeing. Hoeing. - Hoeing is an operation that consists in loosening the surface of the soil with the hoe: it's one of the most necessary, and contributes effectively to the beautiful vegetation of all plants. It makes the soil permeable and allows atmospheric gases to exert their influence on roots and fertilizers. Rain easily penetrates the soil, whereas it runs off without penetrating it when the soil is covered with the crusts that form on its surface. The half of the same square that has been hoeed will produce good crops, while the other half, left untouched, will only produce poor vegetation. It's to this often-repeated operation that our Flanders region owes its fine cultivation. Turnips, rapeseed and potatoes are hoeed several times. In other parts of the country, the soil is hardly ever worked in this way. It's also worth noting that hoeing, instead of making the soil drier during hot spells, actually keeps it wetter for longer, making it more resistant to disease. Serfouissage. - This operation, similar to the previous one, has the same aim and the same results: it is performed with the serfouette, an instrument with two or three teeth of varying lengths, depending on the soil to be ploughed. Like hoeing, this operation must be carried out in dry weather. Sealing. - Ploughing consists in treading the 2. ground with jointed feet, or firming it with the back of the spade or shovel. Its purpose is to bring the seeds into immediate contact with the soil, and to give them a slight resistance that makes them sprout faster and more regularly. This operation would be more appropriately called tamping, and is performed in dry weather. Mounding. - This operation consists of piling up earth around the base of the plants; its purpose differs according to the crops and plants to which it is applied. Sometimes it's to protect plants from frost, sometimes to preserve their produce, encourage new roots and give them new growth. Cabbages, for example, are better able to withstand the cold and wind if ridged before winter. This is especially true for potatoes, to protect their produce, give them more vigour and produce a greater number of tubers. When ridged, marsh beans gain new vegetative strength and are better able to withstand winds; the same applies to beans and peas. Buttting is often used to remove the ribbing and leaves from plants: this is how celery, chard, crambe, rhubarb, etc. are bleached. As we shall see later, these different crops are grown not only with soil, but also with manure, leaves and tanning agent. Crop rotation. - To maintain the fertility of the soil, it is essential to alternate crops, i.e. to alternate plants from one family with those from another. For example, plants from the legume family should be followed by plants from the cruciferous, umbelliferous and solanaceous families. Plants with tracing roots, such as strawberries, will be followed by plants with taproots, such as carrots or parsnips. The theory of crop alternation and rotation is of the utmost importance; the herticulturist cannot deviate from it without impoverishing the soil and compromising his harvests. Whether he's renewing his plantings, his beds, his groups; whether he's replacing one vegetable with another, he must never lose sight of the fact that a more or less long period of time is required before plants from the same family can reappear in the same place. Above all, he must never leave his plot empty; by combining and following the right succession of plantings, he will obtain all that the land can produce. If you sow radishes in February, they can be harvested in April, and immediately replaced by lettuce or endive. In May, we counter-plant chicory or romaine, which are in turn counter-planted with cauliflower or savoy cabbage. The last endive or lettuce is harvested in June and replaced by cauliflower. In September, spinach, chervil, lamb's lettuce, etc. are sown on the land that is completely free. The above example shows that six harvests can easily be obtained from the same plot of land in the same year. 4 NATURAL CROPS. VEGETABLES PROPER, LISTED ALPHABETICALLY BY NAME. ARROCH. However, in coarse, sandy, damp soil, this plant does better than in clay soil, which hardens easily with the rains and hailstorms of March. If this happens, the seeds, unable to break through the crusts that cover them, die during germination. If you want to prolong the use of this vegetable, sow it in March and every twenty days thereafter. With the first warm spells, as soon as the plants have reached Om, 15 to 0m, 20, they fruit, continue to grow and reach up to 1m, 50 in height. Seeds germinate in a short space of time and do not keep for more than a year. They are harvested when they turn yellow on the stems, at which point the whole plant is pulled up and hung in a dry place to allow the seeds to ripen. Arrowroot is an annual plant of which there are three varieties, if we consider green as the species: blond, red and very red. In terms of cultivation, the green variety deserves preference. It is a very healthy vegetable, too little cultivated in Belgium. It can easily replace spinach; its taste differs little from that of spinach, and is not even so watery. What's more, the whole plant is edible, with the exception of the root; it can be thinned out as soon as the plant reaches Om.08 to Om.12 in height and used from then on. Arrowroot (artiplex hortensis, Linn.), originally from Asia, was brought to Europe from Tartary at an unknown date. It was highly prized by the ancients: the Greeks called it chrysolachanon or golden vegetable. It belongs to the Chenopoda family; its stems are straight, fluted, stalked and over a meter high; its leaves are alternate, petiolate, pale, soft, smooth, tender, triangular and pointed; the terminal panicle is composed of several single spikes. ARTICHAUT. This vegetable, which is to almost everyone's taste, generally comes to us from foreign markets; our merchant gardeners in particular do not cultivate it enough. Although it requires a great deal of care and expense, this is no reason to neglect its cultivation: vegetables that are expensive to grow are paid for in proportion, especially in winter. In southern countries, cultivation is much easier than under northern skies, where 3. covering is more labor-intensive; not only do you have to cover, but you also have to uncover the plants after every frost, if you expect the thaw to last for some time. Artichokes are best propagated by suckers, which gardeners are accustomed to calling carnations; they are also propagated by sowing: but the first method is preferable, in that it vegetates more quickly and guarantees the preservation of the true species. However, we are often obliged to resort to sowing after harsh winters which, despite the best care, destroy all the old plants. Artichoke soil should be loose and oily; it should be excavated to a depth of Om,50 to Om,60; the roots of this plant, as of almost all those of this family, penetrate very far into the soil. The plants should be spaced 0.80 m apart in all directions: it follows that manure can be saved while promoting plant cultivation. In this way, the points where the eyelets are to be planted are marked out in crossed radii, and the fertilizer is buried on each of the points; in this way, the seedlings are supplied with a greater quantity of nourishing juices, because they are then in immediate contact with all the manure. Cow manure should be preferred for artichoke cultivation; other fertilizers, especially liquid manure and slurry, should not be excluded. Artichokes are prone to rot in cold, wet seasons, and are very sensitive to melting snow. They should be planted on beds that slope slightly towards the south, so that water runs off more easily. The boards should be Om.80 wide, with a line of plants in the middle along the length. The soil is prepared for winter by deep ploughing and fertilizing. At the end of March or the beginning of April, a second ploughing is carried out and the boards are shaped. The points being marked out in a chessboard pattern and at Om,80 apart, we place on each of these points a few handfuls of consumed manure or old tan, and a few handfuls of sand, if the soil is clayey; we mix the manure and sand with a sufficient quantity of the underlying soil, and plant two eyelets 0m,12 apart; or, if a more exact indication is required, on each marked point dig a small circular pit one foot wide and half a foot deep; fill it with consumed manure mixed with sand and soil, as described above. Immediately after planting, you give the plant a thorough wetting, which you repeat for the first few days until the plant has fully recovered. This is easily recognized by the development, cheerful green colour and growth of the young leaves. This is the time to remove one of the plants, especially the weaker one; it's bad practice to leave both plants: what you gain on one, you lose on the other. You can't rationally grow two or more plants on the same spot. This is the theory behind row cropping, which will soon eclipse all other vicious and outmoded methods of cultivation. 8 you will be amply compensated for this trouble in autumn by larger, more beautiful fruit (1). It is also highly advantageous to place consumed manure around the feet of these plants; subsequent watering dissolves the salts contained in the manure, which then serve directly as food for the plants. We have already mentioned that, in northern countries, artichokes need to be covered in winter, otherwise they are inevitably lost. Around November 15th, when the first frosts arrive in Belgium, all dry or rotting leaves are removed, leaving only a length of Om,25 to Om,30 for the rest. Then the plants are mounded with Om,17 to Om,20 of soil: to this end, two lines Om,25 apart are drawn between the rows. Using the spade, and following the line, cut these lines to the depth of the spade, or to Om, 30, and start buttering the feet with the earth that comes out of this trench. When the frost continues, place three or four tree branches or pea oars around the artichokes, and cover the whole plant with leaves or dry litter. Leaves are preferable to litter; they are the best and most natural cover that can be given to outdoor plants in northern climates. (1) Gardeners call the artichoke flower a fruit: this is contrary to the principles of botany. In the artichoke flower, it is the seed that constitutes the fruit; for, according to this science, there is no other fruit than that formed by the pericarp and the seed. (Author's note.) It is very necessary to uncover artichokes when the temperature eases; without this precaution, humidity penetrates to the heart of the plant, and it perishes. In spring, in mid-March or early April, when intense cold is no longer to be feared, mounds and leaves should be removed, but not all at once; the plants, having been deprived of air and light, do badly when suddenly brought into contact with these two agents. They should therefore be uncovered gradually, first on the south side, and only the heart, then the whole stem. In this state, the plants are left to recover for two weeks. After this time, the stems are stripped down to below the eyelets, leaving only two or three of the most beautiful. All the others are cut without leaving any remnants of the heel, which could soon produce other sprays. The best of those cut off are used for propagation by cuttings. At this time, the old stems are also cut off, the plant cleaned, the plants replenished with loose soil, and watered often if the season is dry. Three or four weeks later, the stems come up and form their heads; superfluous branches, or those beyond three or four, must be cut off from the stems; otherwise the plant will have to feed too many branches at once, and the fruit will hardly reach sufficient size. Artichokes are propagated by eyelet in mid-March or early April, as follows: Select the best carnations; keep only the young leaves, and cut off all the outer leaves at 0m.09 or Om.12; remove the woody part by which the carnation was attached to the base of the stem; leave only the tender part, as this is the most likely to produce new roots. When planting these eyelets, care must be taken not to cover the heart of the cutting; this must also be observed for cuttings of all plants in general; without this precaution, they are sure to be lost. If eyelets are planted in dry weather, it's a good idea to cover them for ten or fifteen days with upside-down, bottomless pots; take care to lift these pots every evening and put them back every morning; even when the weather is gloomy, you mustn't neglect to do this. It's very wise to take this little trouble, because very often cuttings from a large number of plants are lost because this care is neglected. This measure is also very useful, as it guarantees the success of rootless carnations planted in the nursery, to be put into place the following August. If you take good care of the carnations you plant in spring, especially if you water the growing plant from time to time with manure water (purin), you can expect to have fruit at the beginning of autumn. Two or three sprinklings of liquid manure, given a month apart, are enough for the whole summer: this practice ensures very good yields. Artichokes produce a second harvest in late autumn, when the stems and superfluous eyelets have been cut off after the first harvest, and the plant has been replanted with new, fat soil. To obtain large fruit, it is necessary to plough the soil deeply before winter, make gullies and use good manure, preferably half-consumed cow manure. Furrows are particularly recommended in wet, clayey soils, where capillary roots penetrate better, which has a major influence on the development and perfection of the heads. Damp soils are not suitable for artichokes, and even less so those that are subject to submergence. Keeping artichokes in winter in Belgium's climate is perhaps the greatest obstacle to extending their cultivation; however, with care, this difficulty can be overcome: experience has shown that they are lost in winter in both dry and damp soils, especially when winter is preceded by a rainy autumn. Here's how to avoid these mishaps: as soon as the autumn frost threatens to set in, cut off the plant's leaves at 0.10 m above the ground: once this has been done, remove the stumps from the soil without damaging the roots, and transport them to a cellar where sufficient daylight penetrates. Bring them together without touching, and place them in dry rather than wet sand, at the same depth as they occupied in the open ground, or even a little deeper. As soon as the weather permits, air is added. In this way, the plants keep extremely well. Another advantage of overwintering artichokes in cellars, orangeries or other places where frost cannot penetrate, is that artichoke fruit can be had throughout the winter; to this end, the most developed head of the plant is removed in autumn; the secondary fruit thus acquires greater strength and continues to vegetate in sheltered places until spring. Another advantage of overwintering artichokes is that the young shoots used for propagation detach much more easily from the stumps than when they are kept in the ground. Artichokes grown in cellars should not be replanted too early: from April 15th to 30th, depending on the weather. At the end of the third year, or in the spring of the fourth, planting should be renewed: it's not that the artichoke is a three-year plant, as gardeners say; but then the plants decline considerably; so, although they are fertilized again, they no longer like the same place; they need to be given new ground. Multiplication by eyelets, as we have already said, is preferable for perpetuating good varieties, which degenerate easily through sowing; in this case, gardeners say that the artichoke has turned into a thistle; indeed, through degeneration the leaves have become thorny. If you want to propagate artichokes from seed, sow them in late April or early May. Seedlings can be sown in nurseries or in the field, and those sown in the field are the best; three or four seeds should be sown in triangles or squares Om, 8 apart. Sowing in rows or broadcasting is only successful in substantial, soft soil; cover the seeds with Om,5 of soil; water them if it's dry; they take twenty to thirty days to sprout. As soon as the leaves are 0.08 to 0.miO long, we pull out the young plants that turn into thistles, i.e. the varieties with thorny leaves. We remove the most beautiful heads by eliminating the others; we tilt the seed-bearing heads towards the ground, so that water cannot stagnate on the receptacle, which would rot the seeds, and also to preserve them from goldfinches, which are greedy for them. DETAILS AND DISTINCTIVE CHARACTERISTICS: The common artichoke (cmara scolymus, Linn.) is a member of the Compositae family. It has a thick, cottony stem, 0.60 to 0.90 m high; the leaves are alternate, large, soft, indented, slightly winged, pinnate and toothed; the calyx scales are oval, thick and fleshy. The artichoke seems to have originated in Africa. The learned Belgian botanist Charles de l'Escluse (Clusius), born in Arras in 1526, says it grows abundantly in the wild in Portugal and Spain, along the Guadiana River, which rises in New Castile. It fills entire fields in the provinces of Alentejo and Estramadure, where it is a nuisance, as is the common thistle (serratula arvensis, Linn.) in some Belgian fields. Artichokes come in several varieties: the gros vert, or Laon artichoke, with large green heads; the violet, less font, with violet heads; the blanc, with very small whitish heads; the rouge, with very small purple-red heads. The large green one is the best and most esteemed. The artichoke differs little from another market-garden plant, which is very close to it; this is the Spanish cardoon, whose petioles and tenderized ribs are edible. 2. are edible, while the artichoke's calyx receptacles and leaflets are commonly used for culinary purposes. Pliny says that artichokes used to be preserved in honey and vinegar, to which a few aromas were added. Pierre-André Mathiolus, physician and botanographer, tells us that the Walloons used them throughout the winter. To this end, they covered the plants with sand in summer, leaving them white, tender and soft: they ate all the grass with salt and pepper. Is it not the Spanish carden that this author is referring to? Even today in France, the young heads of artichokes are eaten with salt and pepper; it's called eating artichokes "à la poivrade". The seeds keep well for five or six years. ASPARAGUS. Growing asparagus doesn't require the diligent care and attention to detail that old-time gardeners used to enjoy. Anyone with a garden of good, loose, free-flowing soil, sandy rather than clayey, can easily grow this precious vegetable, which lends itself so well to supplying our major markets and even exporting to foreign markets. What still stands in the way of popularizing the cultivation of this plant today is the fear of having to spend an immense quantity of manure. This is a mistake. You can very easily start growing this crop without using large quantities of fertilizer. It goes without saying that the land on which you want to establish asparagus beds must be loose and previously used for vegetables or cereals, or that the soil is suitable and in the right conditions; such could be a forested wood. Half a foot of manure piled up in the pits is enough, whether the beds are formed by two-year-old seedlings or by in-place sowing. It is generally believed that asparagus cannot be grown without cow manure. Of course, when cow manure is freely available, it deserves preference; but not having cow manure is no obstacle to growing asparagus. The careful and intelligent gardener can create a compost or mixture that is an excellent substitute for manure that has to be bought at too high a price, or that is needed in the fields. This compost can be made from leaves, decomposing wood and turf, which have been stratified, i.e. arranged alternately in beds, and stirred every three or four months. In the absence of these substances, you can obtain tannée, which is valued at almost nothing in some Belgian towns, at a very low price, or even free of charge. In Liége, among other places, tanners abandon hundreds of carts of it each year to the waters of the Meuse. After eighteen months, the heaped tannin, mixed with butcher's blood and lime, makes an excellent fertilizer, substantial enough to grow camellia; that's what experience has shown me. Liquid manure is also used very favorably to water the substances we have just listed from time to time; and, above all else, it should be added to one of the mixtures indicated, human excrement, commonly known as sludge. From time to time, piles of leaves, grass, tan or litter are sprinkled with this fecal matter, which must be diluted with a sufficient quantity of water if it is not sufficiently diluted by urine. This manure par excellence, which is used copiously and daily for large-scale cultivation in the province of Antwerp, is almost entirely lost in other parts of the country: on the banks of the Meuse, in Limbourg, it is too rarely used. FIRST CULTIVATION METHOD. First, the soil is broken to a depth of 0m.70. This first operation is best carried out in autumn, when the soil is drier than in spring, allowing it to divide better. You should avoid sifting the soil, as some authors suggest; it's a mistake you'll almost always regret: the soil settles too tightly afterwards, and instead of being looser, it becomes more compact, impenetrable to the beneficial influence of the atmosphere, making the soil unsuitable for cultivation. If the soil is stony, stones are removed by hand during drying. The soil from the ripping is piled up and stored, if possible close to the beds being formed, but always in such a way that it cannot shade the young plants, which need light and air. Once this has been done, level out the bottom of the beds perfectly, and arrange a layer of shards, tiles, broken flower pots or gravel, interlaced with short tree branches for ease of arrangement. On top of this first layer of shards and branches, place a bed of half-consumed stable manure, or one of the consumed mixes we mentioned earlier. This well-packed bed of manure should be at least Om 15 thick. If you have plenty of manure at your disposal, let this first bed be 0.20 to Om.30 thick, and you'll lose nothing. But the circumstance of not having fertilizer in abundance should not put off anyone who wants to start this crop; for, as we have said, the retail gardener or amateur can undertake it very well by simply packing the pits with suitable manure 0œ,15 thick. This is easy to understand. Asparagus beds should be worthwhile for fifteen to twenty years, so it's not the fertilizer applied once to the bottom of the beds that can give or keep asparagus beautiful vegetation for that length of time; every farmer with a little intelligence or practice should know that such manure, even if much more, cannot nourish the plants for that length of time. It's the manure we give them every year that must feed these plants, which are quite voracious, by the way. To this end, we add fertilizer, and a lot of it towards the end of each autumn, for which we are amply rewarded. We'll tell you in a moment which fertilizer deserves preference in this respect. Once the manure layer is firmed up and evened out, a bed of loose soil is placed on top, and if possible, 4. substantial soil, i.e. mixed with loam. This bed should be between Om.18 and 0m.20 thick, as the fibrous roots of the asparagus that terminate at the bottom of the claws penetrate quite far into the soil. It is through these roots that the plant draws the juices necessary for its nutrition, and not through the large, almost horizontal roots that lie between the fibrous roots and the collar or crown. These large roots are called fingers or legs, because of their resemblance to these organs. The asparagus plants or seeds are then placed in three parallel rows on 1.30 m wide boards, over an indeterminate length. The plants or seeds should be placed in a checkerboard pattern, spaced 0.50 m apart in all directions. If two-year-old plants are used to form the beds, mark the points where the plants should be alternately, then place a small mound of potting soil on each marked point, on which the roots are placed at an angle. Without this precaution, the roots would break under the load of the soil; they are very fragile, and must be handled with great care. After this, the claws are covered with Om,09 soil. This planting is done in March, at the beginning of the month if possible, or as soon as the weather permits. During the summer, asparagus needs no care other than weeding, hoeing and watering in dry spells. Needless to say, watering should be done in the evening. In November of the same year, cut the stalks to ground level, and fertilize with one of the fertilizers we have mentioned. If this fertilization is done with stable manure, cover the beds with a thick layer of Om,05 or thereabouts; if powdery or slush is used, this layer should be Om,02 or thereabouts; if sheep manure is used, it should be Om,02 to Om,03; if liquid manure is used, it should be sprinkled on the beds in the proportion of about 5 hectoliters on a bed 15 meters long and 1m,30 wide. Street mud can also be used, but the layer should be 0*.07 to 0m.08 thick. These quantities are given here for the first year; in November of the second year, these quantities should be doubled and remain the same for subsequent years. Next spring, plough the beds and cover the plant with Om, 10 of soil. Then give the crop the same care as after planting. In November, provide twice as much fertilizer as in the first year and cover the beds with Om, 10 of soil; the plants will then be covered with Om, 30 of soil. After that, you won't need to give this crop any special care; all you need to do is maintain it as well as possible. In November of each year, cut the stems to ground level and fertilize them with the same amount of fertilizer as in the second year. In summer, the beds should be cleared of weeds as they appear; the asparagus should be hoeed and weeded whenever the soil has crusted as a result of heavy rain. To protect the soil against this accident, which is always fatal to vegetation, it's a good idea to apply a light layer of consumed manure, or, failing that, a layer of old tan. These substances, which prevent the accident, also provide good nourishment for the plant. SECOND PROCESS. The formation of beds by seed is preferable and will, in time, become more widespread. Arrange the pits, the first layer of fertilizer and the soil as described above. In February, the seeds are placed on this soil three by three at the same distance as the claws, and covered with Om,02 of soil. When the plants are a little developed, we leave only the strongest at each point, and carefully remove the others. For the rest, observe what we said in the first procedure. In November, it's time to apply fertilizer; quantities should be as we have established for claw planting. If you use liquid manure, mix it with half the water and water the beds every eight days for four weeks. Poudrette or cesspit manure mixed with water, and even, when the plant has become stronger, without the addition of this liquid, is still preferable; poudrette manuring is only done once, and in November each year. In summer, it's a good idea to water asparagus with washing water; it's very beneficial. THIRD PROCESS. There's still one more method to mention, and it's one that really helps to populate20 this precious plant. Here's what we recommend: plant either seeds or two-year-old seedlings in healthy, well-kept soil, i.e. in a vegetable garden or a field that has been well fertilized and spaded for several years. Don't dig any pits; just smoke the planks as you would cabbages or potatoes; these planks will have the width we have indicated for those of the first method; plant them at ground level, observing the same distances as we have given above. Through annual loading, the boards acquire a domed shape. In November of each year, we give a good manuring; we continue in summer the other cares, such as weeding and hoeing, and we are sure to obtain excellent asparagus. If the beds are more exposed to the cold, cover the edges with leaves or litter. This method is also ideal for large-scale cultivation. Around large cities such as London or Paris, a single gardener sometimes devotes a large number of hectares to the cultivation of this plant: how would he go about buying manure? Considerable advances would be needed to cultivate several hectares using the old method, which would also require immense labor costs. Once the beds have been formed in this way, especially if Fon were to establish them with seedlings in situ, cultivation would cost less than a third of what it would if we dug pits and buried a thick layer of manure. We're not saying that you should be parsimonious with manure; no, we've never heard of a farmer being impoverished by using a lot of manure; but we're not saying that you should be parsimonious with manure, and for the labor savings and fertilizer application all at once. FOURTH PROCESS. We have another method of arranging beds and plantations in Belgium's terres fortes (I). The deeply loosened soil is placed in large 1-meter-wide ridges, with dividing furrows Om,40 to 0m,45 deep, Om,40 wide at the top and Om,30 wide at the bottom. These furrows are traced and made with a chalk line and a spade. Frosts and thaws loosen the soil and prepare it for the pits to be established in February or March. These pits should be Om, 50 deep and 1m, 30 wide; a light layer of small branches, with no stones or shards added, is put in, followed by a layer of consumed cow or sheep manure, 0m, 25 to 0m, 30 thick. The pits are filled to ground level. The claws are planted in a checkerboard pattern on three equidistant lines, the two outermost of which will be at Om, 25 from the edge of the board. The plant is placed in the rows at Om, 50 apart. In October, a layer of manure is added, and gutters are dug between the planks, at a distance of (1) Strong, compact and damp soils can be improved: 1° under the influence of severe drought, they calcine, fall into dust and become fertile; 2° by the action of frosts, they become loose; 3° by the addition of sand and manure, with lime and liquid manure in the first line, they improve considerably. (Author's note.) 10 cées également des deux bords; elles doivent être obliques de haut en bas, d'une largeur de Om, 40 en haut et d'une égale profondeur. The earth from the trench is used to cover the manure on the boards. These trenches also serve as service paths. When things are set up in this way, it's a good idea to throw leaves into the trenches, so that they half-burn in winter, protect the plants from heavy frosts, and cover the beds when harvesting ceases. Asparagus grown in strong soil is beautiful and lasts about ten years. Some growers use three-year-old asparagus plants to form beds, and start harvesting as early as the second year. This method of cultivation differs above all from the previous ones in that gullies are made here, which at the same time serve as service paths, whereas in the previous processes, in addition to the paths, spaces as wide as the beds must be reserved, where the soil used as pits is placed, and which is to be used to successively cover the young plant. These beds of earth are called "ados", and can be used to grow low plants such as bush beans, lettuces, radishes, broad beans, etc., which cannot shade young asparagus. In Belgium, asparagus can be planted in autumn or spring; there are no fixed rules to be established in this respect: we adjust according to the rather variable temperature and weather in our climate. Sowing asparagus in nurseries is best done in March, at the end rather than the beginning. Avoid sowing them too close together when you intend to sell the claws. The roots of this plant are so intertwined that it is difficult to separate them without breaking off many of them. The seeds are sown in rows 0.25 m apart, making it easy to weed and hoe the young plants. Seeds should only be covered from 0m,006 to 0m,010. Asparagus cultivation is based on a property inherent in its nature. No matter how deep the claws are buried, they always tend to grow closer to the soil surface. If we examine this feature closely, we soon discover its source: it depends on the renewal of the claw fingers. These fingers partially perish every year, becoming empty and leaving only a thin film, similar to the membrane of an intestine, a kind of sac that soon destroys itself. The empty fingers are replaced each year by young fingers growing from the bottom of the stems, immediately above those that have just died. This fact explains why the asparagus plant must be replenished with soil and manure every year; without this care, the claws would soon grow out of the soil. An important point to remember is that during the asparagus harvest, which starts in April, great care must be taken not to damage the crowns of the plants. The shoots are cut with a special knife, shown opposite. It is essential to stop harvesting completely at 10 Saint-Jean, June 24, otherwise the layers will weaken and the following harvest will be considerably reduced. DETAILS AND DISTINCTIVE CHARACTERISTICS Asparagus (asparagus officinalis, Linn.) is indigenous to Belgium, where it grows in maritime sands; it is also found on the sea coasts of southern France. In Italy and Sicily, it thrives on the banks of streams and ravines. In the wild, asparagus shoots are no bigger than a goose feather tip, but their taste is stronger and finer. The stem rises to a height of 1 or 2 meters, and is herbaceous, straight and very wiry. Leaves are long, linear, soft, setaceous, gathered in clusters; flowers are solitary, berries bright red when ripe. There are several varieties of asparagus named after their place of origin, such as: asparagus from Holland, Marchiennes, Strasbourg, Sarrelouis, Gravelines, Besançon, Vendôme, Erfurt, Ghent, etc. In the last two cities, asparagus is available from a wide variety of sources. In the last two cities, you can buy very good seeds or plants from the leading horticulturalists. Cut shoots are best and most easily preserved in a water-filled vat, covered to block out the light and kept in the cellar. Fresh water is added daily. In this way, asparagus keeps for at least eight days. 4. As soon as frosts are no longer a threat, from April 15 to May, sow baselle in good fertile soil or terra-cotta, with a southern exposure, at the foot of a trellised wall. However, sown in this way, baselle does not ripen its seeds in our climate; and to obtain perfectly ripe seeds, it should be sown in February or March, on warm soil under a frame, and the young plant transplanted in May against a wall facing south, taking care not to strip the seed-bearing plants of their leaves. - Boussingaultia basiloides, also known as Malabar spinach or American spinach, is native to eastern Asia. It is a climbing perennial whose leaves are used like kale or spinach. Today, we know several varieties with more or less red leaves, the lettuce-leaf variety being the most tender; in the past, the red-leaf variety was the most esteemed. Baselle deserves to be cultivated more widely. It would be interesting to test the usefulness of its very mucilaginous roots. It seems to us that they could be used in medicine, industry or as a food substance. These roots are bundled like those of the dahlia, bristling with mameluate protuberances from which proliferate abundant shoots. As they begin to develop, these shoots taste like unripe wheat seed, and leave an aftertaste similar to raw potato. When fully developed, the roots are large, grayish, conical and abundant. CULTIVATION. In March, April and up to August, pear seeds are sown in borders or flowerbeds, either in rays spaced Om, 25 apart, or broadcast permanently or for transplanting. Weed and hoe in due course. It is often cut to grow tender young leaves. Because it's so easy to grow, the large-ribbed pear can provide a healthy, pleasant food. The ribs, separated from the rest of the leaf and tied together like bundles of asparagus, are arranged in the same way and lend themselves to much the same seasonings. Carde-poirée grows well in all types of soil, without the need for careful cultivation. If you take the precaution of covering it with leaves at the onset of cold weather, you can use it throughout the winter. DETAILS AND DISTINCTIVE CHARACTERISTICS Beet (beta cycla, Linn.) belongs to the Chenopoda family; it has a hard, cylindrical root; its lower leaves are oval, the others similar to those of beet, of which it appears to be the type. Several varieties are grown, known as blond, green, white and red, according to the shade of their leaves and especially their veins. The plant was introduced to Belgium from Spain towards the end of the 16th century, during the reign of Philip II. Blitum capitatum (Linn.) is an annual plant in the Chenopoda family. It grows wild in damp, uncultivated places in France and Austria. It is grown in market gardens as a spinach. It's called strawberry spinach, after its seeds, which are agglomerated into a head and covered by a calyx that turns red and succulent like a berry. It is sown in March and April, in rows or broadcast; the seeds keep for two years. CARDON. CULTIVATION. Ground preparation for cardoons is the same as for artichokes. To produce cardoons at the end of summer, sow in April or May, in good, deeply-tilled soil. Mark out squares Om,90 apart in all directions; make small pits, Om,25 to Om,30 wide and deep; fill them with consumed manure covered with 0m,06 to 0m 09 of compost. Three or four seeds are placed in each pit, Om, 06 apart and 0m, 03 deep. When the young plant has reached its sixth leaf, leave only the most beautiful and uproot all the others. The gaps left between the young cardoons should be used to grow small vegetables such as 1 radish, lettuce, chervil, etc. These small plants can't do any harm, because they're too small. These small plants can't do any harm, because they've already been harvested when the cardoons start to develop. Until October, cardoons need to be crimped from time to time. Their growth is accelerated by watering them more abundantly as the summer gets hotter. In September or October, the cardoons can be put to their intended use. Their long leaves, from 1.50 to 2 meters long, provide the edible part of the plant: these are the petioles and midribs, commonly known as leaf tails and ribs. As each plant acquires the necessary strength and size, it is bound in dry weather with three or four ties of straw or matting; then it is wrapped up to the tip of the leaves with long straw, placed in its natural direction, with the spikes facing upwards: several straw ties maintain this covering. The soil is also mounded around the stalk, covering the lower end of the straw by a few centimetres and preventing it from being blown by the wind. Three weeks after this operation, the cardoon is white and ready to eat; the thicker the straw cover, the faster it whitens. The cardoons should therefore only be tied successively, by giving their straw jackets different thicknesses. This practice is necessary so that they don't all blanch at once, because as soon as they are blanched they need to be consumed, as they don't keep long in a shrivelled state and are bound to rot. 5. If you want to have them in summer, in June or July, sow earlier; but then it becomes necessary to raise the young plant under glass frames, either in pots or in a layer of soil, and put it in the ground when it has four to six leaves. In this case, sow in February, preferably in pots, as the plant, which retains all its root ball when planted in the ground, remains in full vegetation and requires no care other than watering. This planting should be done in a cool, northerly location; otherwise, most of the plants will go to seed. When the frosts start, the cardoons are tied without being stuffed; they are mounded from Om, 20 to Om, 25 high. In the event of more severe frosts, they should be moved to an orangery or frost-free location, where they should be lifted into a root ball and placed in sand, and given air when the temperature eases. The cardoons will blanch and keep until spring. They can also be kept in the open ground: to this end, make a trench 1m,00 deep, 1m,30 wide and as long as you like: cover one of the outer ends of this trench with straw placed upright; against this straw, place three or four feet of cardoon raised in a clod, against these more straw, leaving all the leaves in contact with the air; then a second row of cardoons, and so on. When the cold weather makes shelter necessary, we cover them with sloping straw mats to prevent snow and rain from penetrating. To harvest cardoon seeds, we leave a few plants in the ground, which need to be cared for more meticulously than artichokes. Cardoons are much more sensitive to cold than artichokes, so they need to be covered with a good layer of leaves at the onset of frost, and this layer increased in proportion to the cold. The seeds, which are very similar to those of artichokes, keep for eight to ten years. DETAILS AND DISTINCTIVE CHARACTERISTICS Cardoon (cynara cardunculus, Linn.), a member of the Compositae family, was imported to Europe from Candia in 1658. Its variety is the artichoke. We grow Tours cardoon, which is very thorny; Spanish cardoon, solid cardoon without thorns and artichoke-leaf cardoon. The last two have thick, full, thornless ribs; the last is preferable for quality, and is the best of all. The former is the least good, not only because it is more difficult to manage and the gardener is often injured by its thorns, but also because it is more prone to climbing and its ribs are much thinner. Another remarkable variety is the Puvis cardoon. Worthy of perpetuating the memory of the French agronomist whose name it bears, this cardoon is truly a variety worthy of cultivation in more ways than one. Its leaves, of considerable breadth, with half-full ribs, are thornless, and the plant has such a majestic habit that it is at the same time a true ornamental plant. 18 CULTIVATION. Celery, being a marsh plant, likes moist, oily soil, and lots of watering during droughts, until it is fully grown. To have them all year round, you need to sow them in several seasons, the first time in January, under a glass frame, in loose soil mixed with compost. When the seedlings have three or four leaves, transplant them to another layer Om, 04 or 0m, 05 apart; this operation is useless if the seedlings are not too tightly packed in the first layer. Give the seedlings air whenever the temperature is mild, and protect them from frost by closing the frames and covering them with straw mats or other covers, depending on the intensity of the cold. At the beginning of April, when the seedling is strong enough, prepare a well-smoked and well-amended plot of land, so that it is damp rather than dry. Alternately form a plank and an ados, each 0.80 m wide and of any length; here's how: mark the oblique edges of the planks with a chalk line, to the depth and using an ordinary spade, without disturbing the soil other than by the notch made by the spade along the chalk line. Then, according to the length of the edges just traced, a trench is opened to the depth and width of the spade; the earth that emerges is used to form the ados. As the boards are roughly the width of four times the 14 spade, it follows that after opening the two trenches, a sort of ridge remains; the soil from this ridge should be spread over the board and mixed with consumed manure. Plant four rows of celery about om 22 apart in all directions, so that the outer rows are only Om,06 from the edges; this distance is sufficient. Needless to say, the plants are placed in a chessboard pattern. All that remains is to hoe, weed and water in due course. Celery sown in January should be fully developed by June; then, while the weather is dry, each plant should be tied by one of its outer leaves, without detaching it from the root. This small operation consists in twisting this leaf around the others; while these are held tight with the left hand, a half-knot is made by the top of the leaf itself. Needless to say, rush, straw or matting can also be used. Some people make three ligatures one above the other; we consider a single ligature to be sufficient. As soon as it is tied, the celery is mounded with about Om, 05, om, 06, Om, 07 or 0m, 08 of earth taken from the ados. Eight days later, it's mounded again, and then mounded for the third time, right up to the tips of the leaves. In a month, the celery will be sufficiently blanched. In February, a second sowing is done on a bed or in the ground, with a good southern exposure and sheltered from the north wind. It is of the utmost importance that celery seed be lightly covered and kept constantly fresh; without this precaution, it will not germinate. The young plant is planted as soon as it has acquired the necessary strength. Treat it as described above, bind it and bleach it, so that it succeeds the first seedling in August. In April, a third seedling is planted in the open ground; trained and cultivated as above, it succeeds the second seedling in October. From this third planting, some can be reserved for winter supply. In the autumn months, celery benefits greatly from good soil; it can also be buttered harder than the first crop, even up to four or five times. In our climate, it can overwinter in the ground, but you mustn't neglect to cover it with leaves, increasing the number of covers according to the intensity of the cold; it must also be uncovered during thaws, otherwise the leaves above ground will rot and spread rot to the whole plant. It can also be stored in a cellar or other frost-free place: placed in fresh sand up to the tips of the leaves, and, for greater ease, laid with the roots against the side of the wall in rows alternating with the layers of sand. Air should be provided whenever possible; celery fears humidity and lack of air. It is understood that this refers to the cultivation of common celery. The cultivation of celeriac is the same, except that it does not need to be ridged, and also that it should be given a little more space in all directions. The edible part is the root, which is tender and voluminous. In common celery, the root, tails and blanched ribs are edible. Celery seed-bearing plants require no special care, but celery root should not be planted close to common celery; they could degenerate through reciprocal hybridization. DETAILS AND DISTINCTIVE CHARACTERISTICS Celery, or ache (Apium graveolens, Linn.), a member of the Umbelliferae family, is mainly found in the marshes along the Mediterranean coast. Its beneficial qualities are so well appreciated that country folk call it the good herb. However, some botanographers consider a variety found in the wild to be suspect or poisonous. Cultivated celery is an excellent vegetable; it is digestive, that is, it helps the stomach to digest food. The celery stalk reaches a height of Om, 40 to Om, 60; it is ridged, thick and stalky; the leaves are twice or thrice winged, the leaflets broad, smooth, incised and lobed; umbels axillary and sessile. Among the cultivated varieties we distinguish the following: ache or small cutting celery, hollow celery; solid white, red, pink, adobe, Turkish, celeriac and celery root. Celery root has produced a variety with red veins; it is very good, with a voluminous root. The large violet celery from Tours is one of the largest of the varieties; its ribs are tinted a purplish red. Very large Erfurt celery and large Leipsick glabrous celery are also very good varieties. Celery goes to seed in spring; the seed is harvested in September: it keeps for three or four years, but the new one is always the best; and you should never sow another, of any variety, if you want to obtain good products. CERFEUIL. CULTIVATION. From the beginning of spring to October, we sow the

common chervil, every two weeks, in beds or borders. It can be broadcast, but preferably in rays. Seeds should be lightly covered; they germinate in a few days. The first sowings are done in February, at the foot of a wall or hedge, and in the south; in June and during the summer, sow in the north, in the shade; and at any exposure at other times. The seed ripens within the year and keeps for two years; the first year's is best. Curly chervil, which is very pretty, requires the same cultivation. The seeds of musk chervil are sown in spring, and germinate in twenty or thirty days. Few people like the aromatic, musky taste of this last species. Although chervil and its varieties can be grown in any soil, they grow best in fat, well-soiled soil. Chervil beds should be well weeded at all times, to guard against the poisonous plants that sometimes get mixed in. DETAILS AND DISTINCTIVE CHARACTERISTICS This plant, which holds a kind of middle ground between what we call a vegetable and a seasoning, is 2. very healthy; it also seems to have been cultivated since time immemorial. This herb is widely used in our kitchens to add flavor to dishes. Although the common species is an annual, it can be grown all year round if sown frequently. Common chervil (scandix serfolium, Linn.), a member of the Umbelliferae family, is indigenous to Europe. Musk chervil (scandix odorata, Linn.) is perennial and native to Spain. The first species has a stem a foot or more high; leaves are light green, tender, winged and pinnatifid; leaflets incised; umbels sessile; seeds smooth, black, Om,012 to Om,015 long. It is not necessary to go into great detail about the poisonous plants mentioned above, but it is important to be able to distinguish between them: we will therefore indicate the characteristics of these plants in such a way that they can be understood by everyone. Hemlock (conium maculatum, Linn.), whose poison is very subtle, has a mottled stem; the leaves are dark green, and the whole plant, when crumpled, exhales a wormy odor. Little hemlock (œthusa cynapium, Linn.) has fluted stems. Evil chervil (chœrophyllum temulum, Linn.) has stems that are swollen at the joints and rough to the touch; the leaves are hairy on both sides. P9 CULTURE. Under this name we shall include three varieties of chicory, and in a separate article we shall deal with the cultivation of the other varieties, referring to them by the name of endives, under which they are generally known in Belgium. The wild chicory varieties are: 1° common chicory, found in the wild in fields and meadows; 2° variegated chicory, whose green leaves bear red veins that become very bright when blanched; 3° coffee chicory or native coffee, whose dried, roasted and powdered roots are used as an adjuvant or auxiliary to coffee, either for taste or economy. This powder is commercially known as chicory or coffee-chicory. The variety that produces chicory powder is cultivated in some Belgian provinces, notably Antwerp, and supplies a fairly considerable trade item. A second use for wild chicory is to convert it into what is commonly known as "capucin beard": the blanched or etiolated leaves make an excellent winter salad. This salad goes perfectly with lamb's lettuce, baked beet or finely chopped red cabbage. Various processes are used to reduce the amount of wilted chicory. In spring, sow wild chicory in beds 1.30 m wide, in good soil that has been thoroughly spaded and smoked before winter. During the summer, it requires no care other than weeding, thinning and hoeing. From the beginning to the end of November, depending on the state of the weather, we remove the long, straight, conical chicory roots. Then each plant, one by one, passes through the hands to have its leaves cut off, with the exception of the nascent central leaf, which retains a length of around 10 to 15 millimeters. As the leaves are removed, they are placed in a heap, with the roots on the same side; once this is done, they can be etiolated by one of the following processes. First procedure. - In November, trenches 1m,00 wide and Om,30 deep are dug in the open air. The roots are laid in horizontal layers, all on the same side, leaving only the root collar uncovered. These trenches are covered with poles or branches resting on both edges; straw is spread over them, and it's a good idea to cover it with sufficient leaves to intercept light and protect against frost. The new shoots soon develop, and can be used throughout the winter to make salads or stews, which are very tasty and healthy. Second process. - Layers of hot manure are prepared in cellars or basements, sheltered from light and outside air, and bunches of chicory, about 0.20 m thick, are placed upright and close together. After a few days, the chicory sprouts white, tender, long and thin leaves; as soon as they reach a length of 0m,15 to 0m, 20, they are cut off above the collar for use or sale; they soon grow back, can be cut off again, and so on until a third time. This leaves the roots, which are also edible and prepared with a vinegar sauce; they are bitter and healthy, but not to everyone's taste. If they are not used in cooking, they can be sold to manufacturers of café-chicorée. Third process. - Chicory can also be blanched in uncovered crates, lying on their sides in dark cellars; the roots are arranged in superimposed layers, leaving only the collars exposed. The roots alternate with layers of potting soil Om,05 to 0m,06 thick. Alternatively, in the cellar, barrel circles are placed on beds of soil Om.05 to Om.08 thick, followed by a horizontal layer of roots whose collars rest on the circle; these roots are covered with a new layer of soil, on which a hoop is placed, leaving the lower collars free; a second layer of roots is then placed, and so on, until the stacks are 1m.00 to 1m.50 high. Here's another way of blanching wild chicory: in November, arrange the roots in a barrel with a hole in one end and a few small holes in the other. At about O ,09 to 0m, 10 above the bottom, we make a line of holes all around the barrel, as close together as possible. These openings can be the same size as the bunghole, so that a bunch of chicory can pass through each one. At the bottom, a bed of potting soil is laid up to the level of the lower part of the openings; the bunches of roots are placed there, with the heads or collars in the openings; they are covered with Om,09 or Om, 10 of potting soil: there is a second row of holes, above this one a third, and so on, up to the top of the barrel, which is placed upright. When the barrel is lined, a dampening is given, which is sometimes sufficient for the whole winter; however, if the leaves wilt, a second dampening must be given. Fourth process. - A final, very simple method, which remains to be discussed, consists in spreading a layer of Om,05 to Om,07 soil in the cellar; on top of this, a layer of chicory roots, collar out; then a bed of soil or compost of the same thickness; on top of this bed, a new layer of roots, and so on. D DETAILS AND DISTINCTIVE CHARACTERISTICS Wild chicory (cichorium intybus, Linn.), a member of the Compositae family, is indigenous and perennial. The stem, 5 to 6 decimeters high, rises much higher when cultivated; it is cylindrical, firm, branched and hairy below; its leaves are lanceolate, sinuate and toothed like those of the dandelion, a little hairy on their sides. Flowers are blue, almost axillary. Seeds keep for up to ten years. CHICORÉE SAUVAGE, see Lion's tooth. CHOUX. CULTIVATION. This genus contains a few species and many varieties, some of which make healthy, pleasant foods; most are easy to grow. First, we'll look at the most popular varieties, in particular white and red cabbage; then we'll review the other varieties, some of which require special cultivation. White cabbage. - All soils are suitable for cabbages: sandy as well as clay soils. In sandy soils, with good, half-consumed cow manure, you can still obtain mediocre cabbages; these same soils, amended with clay and the aforementioned manure, can give a very fine product; in strong or clayey soils, you can even gain very fine cabbages, without adding sand, provided that the soil has been spaded in good time, and that you have given a good manuring of cowshed or stable manure, half-consumed. Here, it should be noted that cow manure is preferable, even if the soil is damp and compact by nature. A fertilizer that is extraordinarily suitable for cabbages is pond mud, in sufficient quantity. This mud must have been exposed to the open air for one or two years, and stirred three or 99 four times a year. This fertilizer is highly recommended, and can be made even more active by adding cesspit manure. The last fertilizer is added in the following way: a square, wide trench is opened in the upper part of the heap, which itself is square; the above-mentioned stercoral matter is poured into it; one or two days later, when the liquid matter of the fertilizer has penetrated the heap, the trench is closed again with the earth or mud that has come out of it, and the heap is turned and mixed well to form a homogeneous mass. With this kind of fertilizer, you're almost certain to get good cabbage products. Cabbage is a great soil leavener. As a general rule, any plant that greatly depletes the soil needs a lot of food, which means a lot of fertilizer. A famous agronomist has said that cabbage is a plant that impoverishes the farm garden, if it is not consumed on the farm itself by men and cattle. In the latter case, we return to the soil what has been taken from it. We've said that mediocre cabbages can be obtained from the least fertile soil: sand. It follows that excellent products can be obtained from good free soil, i.e. a mixture of clay and sand. We remind you here that the land to be planted should be deeply ploughed, and fertilized with half-consumed cow manure, pure pond sludge, or better still, mixed with sludge or pudding. It is not necessary to spade the soil for a long time before planting: eight or ten days are enough, by which time the soil has already settled down suitably. Cabbage prefers moist soil, provided there is no stagnation of water, to dry soil: drought and hot weather are not good for it. Watering is always to its advantage, and cabbage thrives in warm rains. Cabbage beds can be ploughed flat; this is the most suitable method: watering is easier, as are hoeing, ridging, etc. For wet soils, we recommend planting on slopes inclined to the south; this method has a number of disadvantages: 1° by reflecting the heat back to the plant, these inclined slopes give it extra heat, which it doesn't need in summer; 2° the beneficial rainwater runs off at the bottom of the slopes, and the cabbages don't get enough of it; 3° if it's to prevent water from stagnating on the roots in winter, we believe that this accident cannot be prevented in damp soils, by planting cabbages on slopes; for, these eminences are hardly raised above Om, 50 from the base to the top: this elevation is insufficient to prevent water from remaining on the roots of cabbages planted in the middle of the slope. In some of our provinces, Limbourg in particular, we have seen cabbages grown in the same way as in the south of France: they are planted on flat ground, in furrows Om.10 wide and as deep. This is detrimental to the plant in winter: water stagnates in these gullies; snow and ice accumulate there and do great harm. In Belgium, this method is only suitable for summer planting. All in all, we recommend planting on flat ground. As cabbage cultivation requires constant care, hoeing, ridging and watering are much easier on even soil. If you can't raise seedbeds, and harvest perfectly free seed yourself, which is very-difficult in some provinces, you can get top-quality seed from good trading houses or reliable gardeners who live where the species or varieties you want to grow grow best. That's how we get the seeds for large white and red cabbages from Maestricht. Nowhere in Belgium do they come better; they thrive there without bastardizing, better than in other parts of the country. Good cabbage seed, grown to perfection, is black, shiny and uniform, without a mixture of red or wrinkled grain; it retains its reproductive capacity for six or seven years. Cabbage seedlings are sown from August 15th to the beginning of September; varieties such as York sprouts and other small early varieties are not sown before the end of August. These seedlings are planted out in October or November, as are large white or red cabbages; or they are transplanted from nurseries and planted out in February and March. These should be spaced Om, 60 to Om, 90 apart, and staggered. If the soil is good and oily, and if you have the large species, the distance of 0m, 90 in all directions is preferable to any other. Hoeing should be carried out whenever the soil is more or less beaten by rain or watering. Young plants should be hoeed as soon as they are big enough to undergo this operation, which should not be delayed too long: the leaves, having become large and broad, no longer allow you to approach them for hoeing without breaking them, which is always very harmful to the plant. If you have neglected to hoe them, and they have become a little too large, you should wait until the most favorable moment of the day, i.e. when the leaves are flaccid from the heat and bend without breaking. Mounding is done with a hoe or spade; the plant is well surrounded by soil, but care should be taken not to cover the heart. The cabbages we've just mentioned are also sown on the bed in February; the plants from these seedlings are put in place at the end of March and during April; their produce follows that of autumn. Sow again in early March, in a well-soiled bed, at the foot of a wall and facing south. Later, until the end of the month, we continue to sow in well-soiled soil and a little shade: flea beetles, the bitter enemy of the entire crucifer family, don't attack them as quickly in shade as in full sun. These last seedlings are planted out permanently in May. To help the growth of cabbages that are already in the best conditions to thrive, and that have good, clean soil, rather strong and moist than light and dry, well fertilized with the manure we have indicated; to help, shall we say, their growth, we can still smoke the plants with liquid manure or sludge. There's no need to worry about giving them too much fertilizer; on the contrary, by administering large doses, you can make them grow, so to speak, at will. The main varieties of white cabbage are as follows: large German cabbage, Alsatian cabbage or quintal cabbage; it has a short, very thick stem, and the apples become enormous in rich, cool soil; this variety is mainly used to make sauerkraut; - large Dutch cabbage, stubby Brunswick cabbage; the latter has an extremely short stem, and the apples are tightly packed, flattened and resting on the ground without showing their stems; a good variety, but the apples do not become as large as in common cabbage. Other very good varieties include: England's super-fine hâtif; Battersel's hâtif; imperial hope; hâtif non pareil; and the Germans' gros centner, known as 100 pounds. Lesoinne cabbage enriches the genus with two excellent varieties belonging to the white cabbage series. One apples well; the second, like our green cabbages, does not. According to Professor Morren, who describes this plant in the Annales de Gand, these two precious varieties were discovered by Mr. Adolphe Lesoinne, in the vicinity of the small town of Avilès, in Asturias. One advantage worth noting for the cultivation of this cabbage is that it seems to keep well and without degenerating, under Belgian skies; we know that some species or varieties, as we would like to call them, are excessively sensitive to expatriation; example: the cabbage-sprout. The Avilès cabbage can be recognized by its unique characteristics: its white ribs open out into equally white veins in the pale-green parenchyma of the leaves. Understandably, these nuances give this new cruciferous plant, introduced to Belgium in 1842, a very pleasing appearance. It is grown in the same way as our white cabbages. York cabbage. - The sub-varieties are: York cabbage, small, oval, elongated head; very early and highly prized; it has in turn sub-varieties: choucabbage or superfin, smaller, very early; - early dwarf cabbage, shorter stem and head; - groschoud'York, the head is stronger; it is a little later:- sugarloaf cabbage, early, a little greenish-blond, conical apple, tender and of very good quality; - Winnigstadt cabbage, a precious variety recently imported from England: it has the advantage over other cabbages of peeling, not only in spring like these, but also in the late season; consequently it can be planted before or after winter, whereas the other cabbages in this series must be planted before winter; - the Pomeranian conical cabbage, an excellent variety, but prone to degeneration. These York cabbages and their sub-varieties are all excellent vegetables; it's surprising that they aren't widely grown in Belgium. If you go anywhere in the province of Antwerp, you'll hardly find a single plant. Not so in the province of Liége, where this cabbage is appreciated to the full; around the city of Liége, this plant occupies extensive land and offers the consumer and vendor considerable produce. The only difference between York cabbage and its varieties is that it requires spacing of only 0.45 to 0.50, 0.55 to 0.60 meters in all directions, depending on the strength of the variety and the fertility of the soil. Red cabbage. - This is just one variety of MARAICULTURE. 2. white cabbage; it has several sub-varieties, and is grown like white cabbage. Among the red cabbages, we'd like to mention the following: very large Ghent cabbage, large, early Dutch blood cabbage; - the same late variety; - Erfort blood cabbage; - Erfort blue cabbage; - and the small, super-fine Utrecht black cabbage; all good varieties. Savoy cabbage. - Milan or pommé-frisé cabbage, as the French call it, is generally known in Belgium as Savoy cabbage, and not without reason, since it spread from Savoy to Italy, France, Germany and Belgium. Two varieties are cultivated in particular: the early Savoy cabbage and the late Savoy cabbage. The early Savoy cabbage is sown at the same time as the white cabbage, from April 15 to September, in loose, rich soil. Then, in October or November, it is planted in staggered rows, 0.45 m apart in all directions, or planted in nurseries for permanent replanting in early spring, as soon as the soil is in a suitable condition. It should be noted here that early Savoy cabbage should never be planted in spring, when it can be done in autumn; it's a big delay to do it then; it should always be planted before winter, behind a wall, building, hedge or wood that protects it from the north winds and frosts; in this case, it's sure to be available long before those grown in the middle of the garden and without shelter. A final remark to make is that it is of the utmost importance to hoe the soil in spring as soon as the weather permits. The same cabbage can be sown at different times of the year; a large garden should never be deprived of this good vegetable. For example, in addition to autumn sowing, spring sowing is done in March, April and May; sowing in these three months successively provides edible plants for the whole summer. For autumn and winter, we have the other variety, late Savoy cabbage; cultivation is absolutely the same, except that it is only sown once, in March, for planting in May. This variety differs from the other in that its leaves are more finely curled, less blistered; its apples are harder, tighter, and most often have a sort of hollow at the heart. Savoy cabbages also have several sub-varieties, all called Milan cabbages by the French: Milan très-hâtif d'Ulm, medium-sized, very easy to pick, excellent; - Milan à tête lonque, small, pointed, excellent; - Milan des vertus, large, hardy, resistant to cold; - Milan d'automne, very large, hardy, good; - Milan d'Allemagne, dark green, tender and very good; - Pancalier de Touraine, dark green, very good, frost-resistant; - Pancalier blond, similar to the above, less frost-resistant; - Würzinger green; - Drumhead, delicious; - Ulm late, large; - Bloemendael yellow; - Utrecht yellow, early; and Vienna cabbage, early, low, suitable for forcing. These and other varieties, not all of which can be mentioned here, are vegetables that deserve the attention of growers in every respect. Brussels sprout, rosette or spray cabbage. - This cabbage is a product of our soil. Other countries are obliged to bring in their seeds from Belgium, in order to obtain this excellent vegetable. It provides gardeners with great advantages: the sale of this product is always assured; grown in large quantities, this cabbage finds an easy placement. Although the plant is found in Belgium on its native soil, there are nevertheless places where it has a special liking; this is how we see it grow with exceptional vegetation in the vicinity of Brussels, Louvain, Antwerp, Mechelen, Lierre and so on. The seeds of this cabbage are sown from the end of March to the beginning of May; sown later, the little apples along the stem, called rosettes, no longer have time to form properly. It is planted in staggered rows, 0.45 m apart. In terms of fertilization and soil preparation, cultivation is the same as for cabbage. Some gardeners still follow a routine that is detrimental to the production of beautiful rosettes; it consists in stripping the stem of the large leaves that cover it from base to tip. Without needing to be torn off, these leaves fall spontaneously, after having given the rosettes vigor, by giving up part of their descending sap before withering. Bastard broccoli, known as boeren-spruit, is a later variety than Brussels sprouts, producing longer and setting seed more slowly. Its flavor, which is derived from the type from which it is derived, is milder and more pleasant than that of ordinary cabbage. Brussels sprouts are more frost-resistant than Savoy cabbages, withstanding 5° R. and colder; they only freeze when there's a continuous northerly breeze, at which point the plant really dries out; this happens especially when there's no snow and the sun destroys anything green or tender. So, despite the hardiness of this cabbage, you can lose the most precious winter supply. There are ways of avoiding this unfortunate accident: Before the frosts, remove all the plants by lifting them with a spade and grasping them close to the roots so as not to injure the rosettes. They are then transported to a square, where they are placed in tight rows in furrows dug in the same way as for ordinary drying; when the second furrow is dug, the first is filled in, where the cabbages, which have retained their entire root ball, lie obliquely, with their heads facing south. When placing the cabbages in the furrows, care should be taken not to lay the plants so flat that the rosettes rest on the soil, as this would cause them to yellow and even rot. Once this has been done, straw and leaves 7. can be thrown on top during intense cold, and the plants will be guaranteed. This method is very practical for large-scale cultivation. If another method of preservation is desired, a trench can be dug in proportion to the quantity of cabbages to be protected; this trench will be Om 30 deep, and the soil coming out of it will be placed on the edges. The cabbages are planted upright, one beside the other, without the rosettes touching. At the onset of frost, straw stakes are formed, resting on poles in the shape of a double roof; an entrance is made in the stakes, and the rosettes are harvested there throughout the winter. Another method used in our country is to cover the base of the cabbage stem, while at the same time ridging the soil. To this end, the cabbages are removed from every fifth row; a trench is dug along the entire length of this row, Om 30 wide by the same depth; the soil is thrown to the right and left, covering the entire bed; the cabbage stalks are ridged, making the soil healthier; any weeds that may be found on the beds are covered and serve to amend the soil. This is a good and rational practice. For seedbeds for this cabbage, choose the most beautiful plants with tight, closely-spaced rosettes; the plant should be stocky, large and medium-sized. Care should be taken not to plant it near any other cabbage; the breed is highly susceptible to cross-breeding. This rule applies to all species and varieties of the genus. Green cabbages. - These cabbages, some of which are of excellent quality, are not grown in all parts of Belgium. However, they grow everywhere without any marked preference for certain soils or exposures, which is a real advantage. Green cabbages are the fastest-growing; they never spike; the leaves and petioles are taut and delicate, enough to be eaten without spiking. They deserve to be cultivated in every respect: good produce, excellent flavor, healthy food, they come in a season when other vegetables are lacking. They are sown from early April to May 15. They are grown in the same way as Brussels sprouts, except that they need more space in the rows (Om.60). They are even hardier than Brussels sprouts; they need neither to be covered nor tucked away under straw mats or other shelters. All you have to do is lay them down with their heads tilted towards the south; frosts not only do them no harm, but they must be frozen before they are fit to eat; frost makes them tender without wilting them. We count the following varieties among the green cabbages: pancalier or green kale, curly kale, variegated kale, tricolored kale and fuzzy kale. This section also includes the cavalier or tree cabbage, which reaches a height of five to six feet; the mille tétes cabbage, which is less tall, but produces a large number of lateral sprays; the grand frisé du Nord cabbage, which is very tall, has dissected leaves and resists the cold well; and the palm cabbage, whose leaves are gathered at the top in a rosette. Other varieties of superior quality are beginning to appear in our gardens: green kale, low-stemmed and very tender; blue or violet kale, low-stemmed; there is a sub-variety with higher stems and broader leaves; both are very good and very hardy against frost. Kohlrabi. - Kohlrabi stems are highly-developed and swollen to form a ball above the ground, called a tuber or apple by some; this apple is as delicate as cauliflower; however, kohlrabi is not grown in such large quantities. They like good, open, fertile soil and lots of watering: then the apples or kohlrabi develop more quickly and are more tender. They are sown from the beginning of April to the beginning of June, and planted at a distance of Om, 50 in all directions. In addition to watering, all they require is timely hoeing. There are three varieties of kohlrabi: Kohlrabi or Siam kohlrabi, forming balls above the ground with bulges from Om,10 to 0m,15 in diameter; purple kohlrabi, more voluminous than the first; yellow kohlrabi. These three varieties have further sub-varieties: late white, dwarf hátif, Vienna white, small-leafed, early; Vienna blue, small-leafed; early English white and blue, artichoke-leafed, etc. Kohlrabi raves or apples are formed in August, September and October, depending on when they are planted. The latest-forming kohlrabi are the best for winter storage, and have no woody streaks in the interior, which is sometimes the case with those that have matured too long. Kohlrabi are harvested in October and stored in a cellar, roots in sand, to keep them well into winter. To harvest the seeds, we set aside the most beautiful, large, round plants, with leaves that are small and few in number rather than strong and numerous. These seedbeds are planted in the open ground, away from other seed cabbages, around mid-March or early April, depending on temperature. Turnip cabbage, turneps, or Lapland cabbage. - Savoy cabbages are closely related to kohlrabi, and are perhaps only varieties of the latter. Their cultivation is the same, and differs only in that the kohlrabi can remain on the spot where they were sown. In this case, sow lightly, weed and hoe as for those planted in rows. Kohlrabi or turneps produce a fleshy root, oblong like a large turnip; this is where they get their name from; they have the flavor of kohlrabi, and like kohlrabi, are healthy and easily digested. Several varieties are known today: ordinary kohlrabi; early, tender kohlrabi; red-necked kohlrabi, with red-tinted ribs and veins; white or large late English turneps; early white English turneps; large purple English turneps; yellow English turneps; etc. Some of these varieties are no different from the others. Some of these varieties differ only in shape or color. Rutabaga cabbage or Swedish turnip. - Rutabaga deserves preference as a vegetable among the turnip cabbage varieties; it resembles turneps, but vegetates more quickly. Its root is yellowish. It is grown like kohlrabi or beet. Still in the ground, it withstands frosts much better than turnips; in heaps, it doesn't keep much better than turnips; it is also grown for cattle, feeding them well; all livestock seek it out. CAULIFLOWERS. Growing cauliflower requires a little more care than other cabbages. The same fertilizers we have indicated for cabbages are suitable for cauliflowers. The same does not apply to the type of soil: while cabbages thrive in strong, moist soil, cauliflowers prefer lighter, loose, well-soiled soil. Three main varieties are grown: the tender-headed cauliflower, which is earlier than the others; it is less fussy about the quality of the soil, but as its head, which is less voluminous and not very tight, is prone to opening, gardeners usually prefer the other two varieties, known as semi-hard-headed and hard-headed cauliflowers. Tender cauliflower differs from the latter two varieties in having narrower leaves and less volume in all parts of the plant. Semi-hard-headed cauliflower deserves to be grown in preference to all the others; it is the best of all; the apples acquire a large volume. It is a little slower to form than the previous variety, but by compensation it lasts longer. The plant is strong, the leaves broad and long. The hard-headed cauliflower is the slowest-growing; the market gardener doesn't like to grow it, because it waits too long. We recommend it to the amateur with large gardens; while cultivating the others for their earliness, he can give this one a bed; it gives bigger, firmer and whiter apples; it succeeds all the others and resists a little frost. We especially recommend the following two varieties: Petit Salomon, early, tender-flavored, excellent; good shape, tight; fine and never becoming very large. Gros Salomon belongs to the demidur class, giving very large apples; a little later than the previous one. These two varieties are the most widely grown by Paris market gardeners. Autumn sowing for spring. - From August 15 to September 15, sow in the open ground on old potting soil or on consumed cow manure, spread and compared in the proportion of three barrows on a bed 4 meters long and Om, 50 wide; for this same space, 16 grams of seed are more than enough. The bed should face south. As soon as the seedlings are Om.06 to Om.09 in height, they are transplanted under a glass frame onto good free soil, covered or mixed with a few centimetres of compost. As long as frosts are not to be feared, the frames should not be used; otherwise, the plants will grow too quickly and wither due to lack of air, an accident to which cauliflower is very prone. If the plant is found to be overgrown, it should be removed and immediately replanted in the same place. The space given to the plant when transplanting is Om, 10 in all directions and in rows. When planting cauliflowers under glass frames, take care to place them as close to the glass as possible; this is another way of preventing them from shrivelling. For those who don't have a frame, and this is often the case with commercial gardeners, the best way to overwinter cauliflower plants is to plant them in the economic tarpaulin: this is a casing made up of four planks Om,30 wide; the two longest are 2 meters, the other two 1m,30 long. These four planks are inserted into a trench of the same dimensions, held in place by a few stakes driven down to ground level and the edges of the planks. A wooden cover is placed over the trench, loaded with leaves, litter, straw mats, etc., according to the intensity of the cold, never neglecting to provide air whenever the weather permits. Overwintered seedlings are planted in February, March or early April; no fixed time can be determined, as planting must be regulated according to the weather. They are planted staggered at a distance of Om,60 in all directions. Whether sown on a bed or in the ground, seedlings should be carefully uprooted to preserve as much soil as possible for the roots. Replant quickly, without giving the plants time to become flaccid; the success of the crop depends in part on the speed of replanting. When the weather is hot, we recommend planting in the evening and watering; evening should be preferred for planting all cabbages in general. After this initial watering, no more should be given for two weeks; experience has shown that, after 21 8 leaving the cauliflower in this way, it produces apples of better quality and more quickly, and is less prone to borgner (which is abortion of the apple) than if it were watered every day after being planted. Winter and spring sowing for summer. - In the early days of February, sow on a warm bed or under a frame. Three weeks later, or when the seedling has four or six leaves, it is transplanted to another bed. At the end of March or in April, the seedling can be planted in the ground. To protect it from night frosts, cover it every evening when frost threatens, either with flower pots or conical baskets made for the purpose. This cauliflower yields its product in June-July. Sow from March 1 to 15 in a sheltered bed under a frame or straw mat. Three or four weeks later, the seedling can be planted without prior transplanting. It produces in July. From April 15th to May 15th, seedlings continue to be sown in the open ground several times, so that there are seedlings to follow the first ones; they are planted without prior transplanting. These plantings bear fruit from July to September. During the months of June, July, August and September, if the summer is dry and hot, cauliflowers require copious watering, especially when their buds are closing. Summer sowing for autumn. - From May 15 to June 15, the last cauliflower seedlings are sown. These flower in the last months of autumn, and keep well into winter. They are sown in earthen beds in the shade, and put in place without being transplanted. In our Flemish provinces, a few good growers take special care in preparing the land to be used for cauliflowers. In October, they cover the squares intended for spring planting with 10 to 13 centimeters of half-consumed cow manure; they then cover this fertilizer with a layer of soil of the same thickness, making line-drawn trenches 0.25 to 0.30 meters wide and of equal depth. In this way, the soil is ridged, which keeps it healthy over the winter. Not content with this amount of fertilizer, some growers still water the cauliflowers with liquid manure from time to time, during the course of their vegetation. It's easy to see that this is a good, rational way of growing cauliflower, and one worth following. When planting young cauliflower plants, both for transplanting and for setting, it is important never to bury the stem beyond the root collar. Cauliflower wants to be shaken by the wind, so never butter it. When fully developed, cauliflower apples should be covered by the upper part of the leaves, which should be flexed by breaking the ribs from the outside in. This small operation protects the apples from too much sun and rain, and helps them keep longer. As for cauliflower seed, although it can be obtained in Belgium, we recommend bringing it from Holland, which supplies very good quality. If, however, you want to obtain the seed yourself, you choose and keep the best cauliflower plants to put in the open air after the spring frosts. The apples must be large, firm and hard, with white seeds and short stems. Seeds ripen in August-September. Don't wait to harvest until the last siliques have ripened. As soon as about half of them have ripened or turned yellow, carefully pull up the plants and place them with their clods in sand or damp earth in a shed or other place accessible to air and wind. The seeds ripen there, protected from the avid birds and the strong winds which, shaking the siliques, cause most of them to be lost. Conservation - Before the first frosts, cut the stems as close to the root collar as possible; remove the leaves, leaving Om,08 or Om,10 of the rib that supports them, then place them on boards in a dry place. Ripe cauliflowers can be stored in this way for one to two months. When you want to use them, dip the stalks in water up to the head, for one or two days; they come back and are as fresh as when harvested. However, they should be used early enough, otherwise they will melt when cooked, leaving only a fibrous mass. Some cauliflowers from recent plantings may not have sprouted at the start of the frosts; in this case, we remove them, cut off some of the outer leaves, and plant them very close together with their root ball in a trench 0.60 m deep and the width of a frame trunk; we then place the trunk and frames, which we surround with new manure, on the outside. Treated in this way, cauliflowers are not very large, but can be enjoyed well into the season, sometimes as late as March. Broccoli seeds are sown very lightly and for the first time from April 12 to 18; the second, from May 18 to 24; the third, from August 19 to 25. When the young plant has six to eight leaves, it is planted two feet apart, in loose, greasy soil watered with liquid manure. After planting the strongest plants from the second sowing or from May, those that were left in the bed because of their weakness are potted in loose, oily soil. Place them in the shade for some time, but never let them suffer from drought. In July or August, we bury these pots so that the edges are two or three inches below the surface of the soil; then we dig a furrow around and near the edges of the pots so that watering is easy. In autumn, the plants are ridged to resist the wind. Cultivated according to this procedure, which is followed by English gardeners, broccoli produces its apples in October, before the first frosts. In November or December, depending on whether cold weather threatens to set in, all pots are removed and placed under a frame, or only frost-free; a well-lit, well-ventilated cellar at a mild temperature may suffice in a pinch. The apples, which were only in their infancy when the plants were brought in, continue to form and complete 8. their development. Treated in this way, this vegetable provides an ample supply throughout the winter. The plants are potted in October, and their apples are used in spring. The method we have just described was devised by Mr. Maher and described in Belgium Horticulture. Broccoli is most similar to cauliflower; its general characteristics are absolutely the same; it differs only in a few secondary properties, such as the color of the apple. Its flavor is at least as good as that of cauliflower, and many people prefer it to cauliflower. Its value as a vegetable crop is not sufficiently appreciated in our country. In England, where several varieties are grown, it is generally preferred; however, our overseas neighbors, though sometimes a little odd, are not without good taste. In any case, the plant is well worth the gardener's care and should be popularized. This excellent vegetable produces apples that are often larger than those of cauliflower; they come in a variety of colors: green, yellow, green mixed with purple, purple, etc. . Since broccoli can be grown very well in the same way as cauliflower, sown at the same time, in May-June, so as not to confuse ourselves, we'll just say that it requires a little more space than cauliflower, and we'll mention the main varieties: Dwarf purple hátif broccoli. - English white broccoli. - Green apple broccoli. - Autumn purple broccoli; green apple mixed with purple. - Early purple broccoli; purple apple mixed with light green; its stems sometimes reach 1 meter in height and, in addition to its main apple, it produces small lateral heads in the leaf axils. - Dwarf purple broccoli; conical-shaped purple apple with a delicate taste. It is very late and forms its head very slowly. The plant remains very low. - Green broccoli with tight head; the head is green. Small and very late. This year's plants often bear their apples in January and February of the following year. Sulfur-yellow broccoli is one of the best, but also very slow to produce apples; sown in April, it produces apples in April of the following year. - Large-apple broccoli; this larger, more developed plant requires more space, Om, 90 in all directions. Sow in March to obtain heads at the same time the following year. - Portsmouth broccoli; gives the largest apples of all known varieties; requires the same spacing as the previous variety. - Broccoli with bracts; this variety differs from the others in that the bracts or leaves that grow between the branches of the apple reflect inwards and cover it. - Broccoli from Denmark or Siberia; this is the best variety for our climate and for the open ground; more robust than the others, it resists frost and temperature variations. Its pale-green stems are just as large and high quality as other broccolis. The earliest varieties are ready for harvest in autumn; the others continue to develop, even in winter, if the rigors of our climate don't get in the way, as is usually the case. If the winter is mild, they can still be harvested; to this end, they are laid down with their stems facing south, and before the onset of frost, they are covered with leaves that must be removed whenever the weather permits. They can also be removed as rootballs and overwintered under glass frames; their development then continues, and their use is assured until February and March. Needless to say, you'll need to cover the frames with straw mats during frosts, and uncover and ventilate them whenever the weather warms up. DETAILS AND DISTINCTIVE CHARACTERISTICS We won't go into the botanical characteristics of cabbage, but we will say in passing that rapeseed (brassica campestris, L.) appears to be its primitive strain; at least that's what botanists think. All other cabbages are merely varieties that are highly susceptible to cross-fertilization and hybridization, such as: cabbage (brassica oleracea capitata); cauliflower (brassica oleracea botrytis); kale (brassica oleracea viridis); kohlrabi (brassica oleracea gongyloides). Cabbage was highly esteemed by the ancients. If certain authors are to be believed, the Romans did without doctors for four centuries, using cabbage as a universal remedy. Cabbage's enemy is the flea beetle. However, if we can't destroy them all in a short space of time, we can at least paralyze their unfortunate effects and save time for the young plant, which becomes stronger and too hard to be penetrated by the mandibles of these insects. First of all, hoe the soil where the young cabbage is planted; the flea beetle escapes in part from these movements of the soil surface. Every morning, while the dew is still wetting the leaves, we sprinkle the plant with a mixture of wood ash and chimney soot until they disappear. A strong infusion of wormwood (1) has also been recommended for watering the plant. It's worth noting that the earth flea is never found on some plants that are in some way unsympathetic to it. We recommend trying to water young cabbage plants with cooled decoctions of these plants; among others, conifer leaves could be used for this purpose; they have never been seen on parsley and many other plants. We have already talked about the preservation of the cabbage species grown in our gardens; it remains for us to say a word about the preservation of head cabbages, such as cabbages and Savoy cabbages. Savoy cabbages keep quite well in shallow trenches, lying close together and in rows, roots covered with soil, heads inclined to the south and covered first with straw and then with a sufficient quantity of leaves, depending on the severity of the winter. To prevent rotting, it's a good idea to place the heads on a layer of straw about Om.04 to Om.08 thick. When the thaw comes, the overwintered cabbages are uncovered. Bring the cabbages into a dry, well-ventilated cellar; place them in beds one on top of the other, with the roots facing the wall on slightly fresh sand or earth; place a light layer of straw on top of each row of apples. A draught should be provided. White and red cabbages can also be kept hanging upside down in attics or other places sheltered from rain and frost. (1) See this plant at the beginning of chapter nine. Recommended by the French missionaries Voisin and Tesson as a highly productive food plant, providing China with apples of considerable weight, Pe-tsai, or Chinese cabbage, has not yet produced satisfactory results in Belgium in terms of cultivation: Firstly, the young plants are of such a soft, tender consistency that great care is needed when handling them for transplanting; they are more fragile than our Roman lettuces, with which, incidentally, they bear a striking resemblance; secondly, we have experienced serious difficulties in getting them to peel. Nevertheless, the plant is worthy of further trials. Pe-tsai has long been known in our European botanical gardens, where it was included under the name brassica sinensis. Its roots are small, filamentous and do not swivel like the cabbages of our countries, so it is content with a very thin layer of vegetation and does very well in light soil. Another obstacle to growing this excellent vegetable is its tendency to go to seed quickly; it has been found that the best way to overcome this disadvantage is to use two-year-old seeds. Easy to digest, Pe-tsai is a very healthy foodstuff, and its cultivation is undoubtedly worth extending, as it is in every respect the same as that of Roman lettuce. Another species of Chinese cabbage is the pak-choï; 6 like the previous one, it is a very good vegetable, but also has the same inherent properties of going to seed. Its glabrous, shiny-green, sharply-ribbed leaves make it resemble cardoon. It is grown in the same way as pe-tsai. MARITIME CABBAGE, SEA CABBAGE, SEA CABBAGE. Cultivated as a vegetable, this perennial plant grows spontaneously in the sand along the coast. Chance has led to its discovery. The waves of the sea having buried some of these plants under the sand, it was found that they had turned yellow and had become tender: their usually hard stems and leaves were then succulent and good for eating. Since then, it has been introduced into vegetable gardens. In spring, it appears abundantly on the markets of the main cities of England especially, and always finds buyers. It is an excellent vegetable. Crambe or sea cabbage belongs to the cruciferous family; it has long roots and naturally likes sandy soil. It is difficult to grow in strong, clay soil. The cultivated plant requires soil spaded deeply in autumn and smoked with cow manure. In spring, in March or April, sow five or six seeds in holes 3 to 4 cm deep and 0.60 m apart; the plants grow strong. The seeds sprout after three to four weeks. Remove superfluous seedlings and leave just one plant in each spot. We do not recommend transplanting, as this is uncertain. During the summer, crambe requires no care other than weeding and hoeing; it's a good idea to cover the bed with a layer of half-consumed manure; like all other cabbages, crambe loves fertilizer. By the third year, the plants will be strong enough to undergo pruning. In December, January or February, mix half-consumed dead leaves with soil, and cover the plants entirely with a layer proportionate to their strength. Depending on the severity of the cold or the severity of the winter, manure is added around this mixture of leaves and soil. After six weeks, if the cold hasn't been too severe, you'll be able to harvest whitened leaves and petioles. Or you can do it as follows: cover the plants with pots proportionate to their size, and surround and cover these pots with fresh stable manure to help the plants vegetate and protect them from the cold. After cutting off the blanched sprays, the pots are placed back on the plants and again surrounded with manure; each plant yields up to three harvests in a year. In this case, wait until March to give a first ridging of 0m,06 to Om,10; then give a second and a third; the leaves acquire Om, 30 to 0m, 40 in length. Maritime cabbage multiplies very easily from cuttings; it resists the most intense frosts in sandy soils; it often melts or rots in loamy or heavy soils. In Moravia, Wallachia, Hungary and Tartary, another species of crambe grows, bearing the epithet tartarica. The root, which has a circumference of Om, 25 to Om, 35 and a length of Om, 40, is soft, fleshy and succulent. It is used in the same way we use celery. The gardeners of Bath, England, who grow a lot of crambe, are quick and easy. Each plant, not staggered but facing each other, is spaced two and a half feet apart, and one foot apart in the rows. Gutters are cut in the widest spacing, and the void can be filled with ashes and leaves, which when consumed provide excellent fertilizer and loosen the soil. In the second year, after sowing or planting, the plants are not yet strong enough to be eroded by means of hot manure; but with this method, not only are the second-year shoots already used, but also the plants undergo a kind of pruning that strengthens them and encourages the emission of lateral shoots. Towards the end of February, if the soil is dry enough, 12-inch-wide gullies are dug along the length of the largest spacing, and the young plants are covered with 8-9 inches of soil. In spring, the shoots are examined by stripping them by hand, and when they begin to emerge from the surface of the soil, when they are 7 or 8 inches long, they are cut off below the lower leaf. Towards the end of April, the gullies are filled in by removing the mounds. When the soil is level, any buds that may have been left behind are cut off, otherwise they will go to seed, weakening the plants for years to come. Sea cabbages destined to wither are never allowed to go to seed. The following winter, we start forcing for consumption. In November, we cover the teenagers with long manure to prevent frost from penetrating the soil. Around mid-December, remove the litter, cover the teas with soil from the gutters, then level the entire surface with fermenting manure. Four weeks after this operation, the manure is removed with a fork or by hand, and the bare heads are ready for consumption. The roots must be covered again with soil and manure to protect them from frost. By the third year, the plants are very stunted; only a sufficient number of shoots are kept; the excess, which would weaken the plants, and any that are too close to the gutters, are removed. Cultivation continues as long as the plants remain strong and healthy, and they live a long life. The etiolated sprays of crambé consist of the stems and nascent leaves united in a kind of elongated apple, perfectly tender. CLAYTONIA PERFOLIATA. A member of the Portulaceae family, native to North America, this plant was introduced in 1794. Its thick, rhomboidal leaves are tristender and slightly acidic in flavor. This easy-to-cultivate annual deserves its place in the market garden in every respect. It thrives in virtually any type of soil and at any exposure; it grows from 12 to 15 inches tall. It can be sown all year round, either broadcast or in rows. 92 It can be cut several times and used in the same way as purslane and spinach. Raw, it can be mixed with lettuces, endives and lamb's lettuce. Under cover, it produces abundantly throughout the winter. WATERCRESS. So far, watercress cultivation has not become established in Belgium; we are content to gather it from the banks of streams or fountains. It would undoubtedly be worthwhile to create watercress nurseries along the lines of those that have existed for many years in Germany and France. Near a city such as Brussels, this type of cultivation could, it seems to us, be successful. This plant is very healthy; it is antiscorbutic and purifies the blood. In the spring, street vendors in Paris offer it to passers-by, advertising it as a health-giving plant. We recommend that anyone with a small source of running water in their garden, or a pond or stream running through it, cultivate this plant, which is so easy to grow that it can be called spontaneous. As the plant is native to Belgium and grows in almost all streams, it's easy to get hold of a few plants and plant them at the water's edge in your garden. If you don't have a small trickle of water, you can dig a sort of channel, levelling the bottom and covering it with a layer of Om,05 to Om,06 potting soil. The watercress is planted in the channel and then submerged in a few inches of water. It will soon appear on the surface, and can be harvested in winter and spring. Cress is a member of the cruciferous family; it should not be confused with the axillary umbel (sium nodiflorum, L.), which is usually found in its vicinity. The latter plant is poisonous; it can be distinguished from cress by its umbellate flowers and saw-toothed leaves. LIONS TOOTH. So far, as far as we know, the dandelion or dentde-lion has not been cultivated; however, this plant, which is sought in spring in the wild for use as a salad, could with care become a good vegetable crop. On river banks, dandelion makes a very healthy salad every spring, similar in every way to blanched chicory. On the banks of the Meuse and Scheldt rivers, in meadows that have been flooded and covered with a few centimetres of sand, dandelion is harvested when the tops of its leaves are showing. It can also be found in the molehills of our pastures. These tenderized leaves are slightly less bitter than chicory. In stews, they are difficult to distinguish from our best endives; in soups, they give absolutely the flavor of scorsonera. To grow dandelion, sow it in spring in strong or sandy soil, taking care to harvest the seeds from the hardiest varieties found in meadows. Then, butter or cover the plants with sand; this is essential. If covered with heavy soil, the leaves will turn white less quickly and be more bitter. The varieties whose cultivation we describe here are known to the French as chicorée; indeed, they belong to this genus; but, as the Belgians know them more particularly as endives, we gladly give them this name, which moreover lends itself to differentiating them from wild chicory, whose cultivation we have described. However, it should be pointed out that, although the famous Linnaeus considered chicory to be a distinct and specific species under the name endive chicory (cichorium endivia), it seems no less likely that it derives from wild chicory and is merely a variety of it. Endive grown in our gardens includes the following varieties: endive de Meaux, with cut, crenulated leaves: when sown early, or when new seed is used, it is prone to bolting; sown in May and June, it does well;- endive fine d'Italie, early and with delicate leaves, is less prone to bolting, and is preferable for spring sowing:- endive scarole, which can be used like the previous varieties; it has the following souvariety: grande scarole dite de Hollande; ronde, with short leaves, likely to peel; blonde, with yellowish leaves. The latter varieties are all broad-leafed. They can be sown from February to July, first indoors, then outdoors. Endive seeds should be lightly covered; they won't sprout if they're over-covered. Sow lightly in a flowerbed, against a wall, in the rising sun. The first sowings in spring 9. should only be of Italian endive, which is not prone to going to seed. The latest endive sowings are the most advantageous; they come in a season when fresh vegetables are in short supply. Those sown in July and August can be tied in September and October, and keep well into winter. When the endive is fully developed and you want to bleach it, then, in dry weather, lift all the leaves and, without compressing them, bind them down with a single tie of rush, straw or matting. Leave them in this state for a week, so that the central leaves can still benefit; then place a second tie towards the end of the plant, and, if it is very strong, tie the middle of the apple again, lest the central leaves escape. About a month after the endive has sprouted, it is strong enough to be transplanted; it is planted in staggered rows at Om, 35 to 0m 40 apart in all directions. The plant requires a lot of water during its growth and until it is ready to be bound. This operation should always be carried out in dry weather: if the endive is bound while wet inside, it will rot. It takes a fortnight to three weeks to blanch. If the weather is hot and very dry, and if watering is deemed necessary, it should be done with the nozzle of a watering can without a spray, wetting the base of the plants without running water into the apples. Sometimes, even rainfall followed by hot weather can cause them to rot. If, at the first frosts, all the endives have not yet been bound, they should be removed from the ground and placed upright in a dry cellar, with the roots in sand, where they will finish blanching. never sow new seed; there is always a risk that the seedlings from these young seeds will sprout. Endive seed retains the ability to germinate for five or seven years and beyond; always sow the oldest. There's no need to talk about the kind of soil this plant requires; any loose soil, whether sandy or well-smoked clay, is good. However, good, free-flowing soil, without excess clay, is preferable. SPINACH. Spinach likes oily, loose soil that's more humid than dry. In addition to the less leafy, spiny-seeded species from which spinach takes its name (spica, thorn, and nardus, back), there is a broad-leaved variety known as Flanders spinach. This is the variety that should be preferred for cultivation; it is more productive because of the breadth of its leaves; as a vegetable, it is even more beautiful because of its vegetation. Spinach is sown from early spring to autumn. In large-scale cultivation, where the grower needs to supply the market with spinach throughout the year, it must be sown every month. The amateur finds it more advantageous to sow at the end of summer, in August. These seedlings, which provide a winter and spring supply when other fresh vegetables are in short supply, are the most pleasant. As soon as the young plants are strong enough to be harvested, they are cut off a few centimetres above the ground, leaving the small emerging leaves in the heart intact. These are intended for a second harvest. When the plants have become more robust, they are no longer cut, but the outer leaves are picked one by one; in this way, a third or even fourth harvest is guaranteed, as everyone knows. Spinach sown in August and September leaves the ground empty in May and June for other vegetables, such as savoy cabbages, beans, potatoes, lettuces, endives, etc. If you sow them in summer, you need to choose a cool spot with some shade. Spinach, which is very prone to set seed in hot weather, hardly bears fruit in cool, shady conditions, or when it does, it has already been harvested. The plant requires no care during its growth other than to be weeded, hoeed and thinned out if it is too tightly packed: the distance between plants, from Om,10 to Om,20, is the most suitable for the broad-leaved variety from Flanders or Holland, also known as round-seeded spinach. This variety has a sub-variety called Esquermes. Its leaves are rounder and it appears a little more robust. In the coldest weather, it should be given a light covering of leaves or litter, which should be removed in February or March, depending on whether heavy frosts are no longer to be feared. Spinach leaves acquire a sort of semi-transparency during frost, which makes them appear frozen and lost: they are in no way frozen and easily regain their natural greenness if soaked for an hour or two in cold water and left to dry on straw for a while. Treated in this way, spinach is more valuable for the market and for cooking. Spinach (spinacca, oleracea, L.), a member of the Chenopoda family, is a dioecious plant, that is, it produces female flowers on one foot and male flowers on the other. Plants sown in autumn come into fruit in May. Once fruiting has taken place, the male plants are pulled out and the females supported by stakes. The seeds can be stored for two to three years. Originally from northern Asia, its introduction into Europe is not well known; it probably dates back to the Crusades; some authors say that the plant was imported into Spain by the Saracens in 1568. BEANS. Marsh beans require well-tilled, amended and smoked soil, and are strong rather than light. They are sown in December and January at the foot of walls, facing south. These initial seedlings are then transplanted into beds towards the end of February or in the course of March, depending on the weather and the strength of the plants. The beans placed against the walls occupy a very small space; one square meter can accommodate three liters; they are sown pell-mell, one against the other; they are covered with. Om,05 to Om,06 of soil. As soon as they are five centimetres above the ground, they can be placed, two or three together, at Om,30 in one direction and Om,50 in the other. The same distance should be observed for seedlings planted without transplanting. 4 As soon as they are 0m,10 to Om,15 in height, they should be deadheaded. This operation considerably increases the strength of the plants, as they form new roots in the new soil around them. At the same time, they are crimped; this is all the care that broad beans require from the moment they are planted to the end of their vegetation. However, crimping must be repeated when the soil is more or less beaten. Never shy away from this light work, especially during droughts; it has been found that one hoeing in very dry soil is worth several waterings. After ridging, Savoy or Brussels sprouts can be planted between the rows; horseradish, lettuce or carrots can also be sown. Early seedlings planted against walls or other shelters should be protected from frost with straw mats or, better still, leaves. From time to time, we uncover a corner of the cover to see if the field mice don't damage it; this happens quite frequently. We now have a quick and effective way of getting rid of these animals: just mix a little phosphorus with wheat flour paste in the proportion of 1/16 ounce of phosphorus to two ounces of flour. Place small balls of the paste in the burrows. When making this paste, avoid touching it with your fingers. These marsh bean seedlings can also be sown in cellars or other frost-free locations, in crates or pots. Here are the main varieties grown in our vegetable gardens: Mazagan or Portuguese beans, which are always small. This variety is best suited to being forced; it is the earliest; it comes to us from Africa, from a place formerly in the possession of the Portuguese. - Fêve verte de Gênes, a little less early and a little larger than the previous variety; it does not produce much; the pods do not contain more than two or three beans -Fève verte de la Chine; much more tender than the previous variety, it has the advantage of always remaining a beautiful green color, even when ripe. Suitable for candying, it will appear as fresh on the table in winter. Productive. - A red-flowered bean, it is early, but has a harsh flavor; it is not highly prized. - Windsor bean, also known as long-podded bean; this is one of the best, very productive; the large, beautiful beans have a frank taste and are not herbaceous, as is sometimes the case with smaller species. - Fêve en éventail; this is the smallest, hardly exceeding Om,10 to Om,15; it is not productive enough for the merchant gardener; but it is perfectly suited to being forced under frame as an early plant. At flowering time, the tops of the plants should be pinched back to prevent the flower from sinking and to protect them from aphids, which then spread all over the plant and spoil it completely. In this respect, the earliest seedlings are the best; aphids prefer to attack seedlings planted after April. It's not easy to get them in autumn; sometimes you can get them very well by cutting the plants when they have given their first green harvest; they then sprout a large number of shoots which bear fruit and produce as they did the first time. For autumn beans, you can also - and this practice should be preferred - cut the flowering plant at ground level. As the plant is still in full vegetative strength, it grows back better than if you cut it only when its fruits are already half-developed. Seed beans are harvested when the pods are black; they are not removed from their shells. They are dried in the attic and kept in this state until the time of sowing, taking care to leave those not needed in their pods. In a dry place and in their husks, they can be kept for three or four years, whereas it is difficult to keep them for more than a year without them. If you need to go to the merchant to buy seeds, you can boldly entrust white ones to the plantation; you'll reject any that are yellow-brown or blackish; they're old and won't sprout. The broad bean (vicia faba, Linn.), an annual plant, belongs to the legume family; it is native to Persia. BEANS. To distinguish beans, we'll divide them into two series: in the first we'll place those with climbing stems; they need to cling to stakes and are called pole beans. This first series is subdivided into long-stemmed beans and medium-stemmed beans. In the second major series are dwarf beans or beans without oars. 2C should be given a good ploughing before winter; however, if the soil has been well tended, i.e. if it has been deeply spaded and well smoked for a previous crop, such as potatoes, cabbage, onions, etc., it is sufficient to spade it well in spring, preferably amend it with cow manure, and plant in due course. Beans thrive in light, sandy rather than hard, compact soil. In hard or clay soils, they should be planted eight or ten days later than in light, soft, warm soils. They can be planted in rows or in clumps; the latter method is preferable, especially for long-stemmed beans; they should be driven and tied around the poles as they begin to cling to them. In row plantations, it would be difficult to carry out this very necessary operation. Although we are strongly in favor of row planting for large farms, we see neither the need nor the usefulness of this modification; on the contrary, planted in clumps, dwarf or pole beans are easier to maintain. Seedlings are planted in staggered rows in hand-made pits 0.03 m deep, spaced Om 70 apart in all directions for beans in the first series, and Om 50 apart in all directions for bush beans. While making these pits, loosen the small clods of earth between the fingers and place 7 to 10 beans in them, spaced Om,02 to 0m, 03 apart. Preferably planted in dry weather. If the surface of the soil becomes too dry, and the beans are planted in the MARAICH GROWING. 2. 10 dust, the seeds would not germinate and would wait for rain to come up, which would not only cause a detrimental delay, but would also make the plants sickly and languid, as in this case they would have gone through a state of demigrination. To avoid this inconvenience, turn the soil to a depth of half a spade at the points where the clumps should be, while covering the beans immediately with this fresh soil. It doesn't matter whether you plant in hot or cold weather: if it's rainy and hot, you can leave the beans in the ground; if it's rainy and cold, you won't plant; the seeds usually rot, so it's better to wait a few days. Beans grow very well under a light layer of wood ash; this fertilizer has a strong influence on their vegetation; it is used for this purpose in some of our country's provinces, especially Antwerp and Flanders. We have never seen it used for this purpose in the province of Limburg. After planting, this layer of ash, Om,006 to 0m,010 thick, is placed on the soil covering the beans. We disapprove of this method; it's better to sow a few days later and in place than to use this unfortunate practice. Because of its delicate roots in its early youth, the bean doesn't like transplanting. For this vegetable, as for the others, we won't be afraid to give it a lot of fertilizer. So, even if the soil is good on its own because of winter cultivation, it can still be improved and strengthened, if I may say so, by using poudrette or liquid manure as an auxiliary. Here's how to use it: a fortnight before sowing the beans, use the hoe or spade to open holes at the points where you're going to plant; in each hole, put a quarter-liter of slurry or half a liter of liquid manure (cow and ox urine). When it's time to sow, i.e. a fortnight after applying this fertilizer (1), the soil is levelled by putting the soil that has come out back into the holes, taking care to break it up and loosen it properly. Then, on top of this manure, without making the slightest excavation, we sow the beans and immediately cover them, making slight mounds or eminences in the shape of an inverted plate. This method, based on experience, is highly recommended; all things being equal, i.e., if the season is favorable, if the beans are of a good type, and cared for in good time, the yield will be considerable with this change in cultivation. In light soils, beans are first sown at the beginning of May; in heavy soils, they are planted only after the middle of the same month. If the beans are hit by a white frost, they are lost; at zero, the temperature is already fatal to them. Planting is done in squares, beds or borders. After heavy rains, if the beans have not yet emerged, and if the soil is (1) Poudrette, pigeon or chicken droppings, etc., should only be used with caution, especially for delicate plants; it is necessary to release the ammonia gas, which cauterizes the plants and destroys their tissues. (Autcur's note.) beaten and hardened, the crust covering them must be carefully cut and divided, so that they cannot make their way through. Beans are not only sown from the beginning and middle of May, but continue to be sown until July, so that they can be enjoyed until the first frosts. As for those sown at the end of April or the very beginning of May, we never put the oars or poles in place before they are out of the ground; since in this season there are still cold rains, the water would run down the poles and stop at the hole of the seeds, which would rot due to this excess of cold humidity. This is not the case for June sowing; a warm rain does no harm; if you want to place the oars before sowing, you can sow around them soon afterwards. Beans require at least three hoeing operations; the first is carried out as soon as they have four leaves, the second after setting the oars, which is done a few days later; at the same time, they are lightly ridged, and the third when they are Om.30 high; they are then ridged again, and quite heavily. If, as is almost always the case, weeds appear during their vegetation, we crimp them again. In Belgium, where we're exposed to fairly strong winds, we're in the habit of fixing the oars with wicker two by two or four by four; or, after tying them two by two, we attach them to other poles or oars, which we lay horizontally between the crossed tops. Fir poles are the best; their tough, rough bark gives the climbing bean stems plenty of grip; then, being straight, they can be neatly placed in the rows. For medium-sized beans, branching oaks or beeches are preferable. Without harming pole beans, either kale or beet can be planted very advantageously between the rows. In all aspects of cultivation, dwarf beans or beans without oars require absolutely the same care, with the only difference that instead of forming clumps of 7 or 10 seeds, only two or three beans are planted at Om, 50 apart; needless to say, they are never given oars. 10. The bean's flower is weakly attached to its stem; this is an unequivocal sign that the plant belongs to a climate where strong winds prevail less than in the northern regions of our globe; for this reason, they should always be planted sheltered from westerly winds, if possible; And for the same reason, the first harvests should be entrusted to hands skilled enough not to shake too much the stems, which are still full of flowers at the top, while the pods are already being picked at the bottom. DETAILS AND DISTINCTIVE CHARACTERISTICS Beans (phaséolus, Lin.) belong to the legume family; the fruits of this natural family are called pods, or legumes, which should not be confused with the word "vegetable", commonly used to designate all edible vegetable plants. Native to warmer climates, it could not be cultivated in Belgium if all the phases of its vegetation were not rapid; it hardly lasts more than three to five months. Beans originated in South America and India, and were introduced to Belgium at the end of the 16th century. For a long time, the species or varieties were limited to the dwarf bean, the pole bean and the princess bean. Today, there are many known varieties, numbering up to three hundred. We don't need to list them all here, as our book is too short. We shall only mention the most widely cultivated varieties: 13 I.-A. The long-stemmed beans are as follows: Soissons bean: this is the common white bean; the young pods are eaten with the husks; the bean is used in winter, either dried or mashed. - Gigantic bean, flattened, larger than the Soissons. White and purple runner bean; more sensitive to cold than the others; very productive; its bean is delicious. Saber bean: owes its name to the shape of its pods, which are wide and long; it is an hon product. In Belgium, Holland and Prussia, the pods are cut into thin strips before the bean is fully developed; they are eaten fresh or candied for winter, or dried slowly in the oven after being lightly cooked. German runner bean or "cossé"; very high stem; medium-sized, flat seeds; large pods: very good in green. Butter beans, early, excellent. Other large-shafted beans include: prudhomme, with very tender pods and small, round seeds. Princess bean, a variety of the previous one; it has sub-varieties, with more or less round grain, all excellent and very tender; the pods, eaten green, remain tender until they are fully developed and even until they turn yellow. Dried in the oven after a light cooking, these beans are excellent for winter provision, and keep for two or three years. Lafayette bean, excellent all-rounder; pods are two fingers wide and Om, 20 long, very tender and stringless; paddles very high; grain yield not considerable. The introduction of this bean is quite recent; so far it is not very widespread. Translucent bean, a singular variety in terms of the color of its pods, which are a beautiful fresh buttery yellow when fully developed. Only then are they eaten, and they are most tender and productive; the grain is good and dry. We highly recommend growing this excellent variety. B. Movennes string beans: Red Prague bean, unremarkable variety; does well only in rich, fresh soil; in dry, poor soil, pods become hard and produce little. Rice beans, very small, oblong, good eaten green or dry. Soap or doe-belly beans, slightly rounded, tawny, good eaten green or dry. II. - Dwarf beans. Runner bean: early, always eight to ten days earlier than the others. - Haricot ftageolet or hâtif de Laon, elongated, very productive, very good for forcing. - Haricot perle, smaller than the haricot riz, both excellent and productive. - Dwarf runner bean: white, flattened, small seed; long, broad pods; good for green and dry harvesting. Runner bean: this is the most dwarf of all beans; it is distinguished by the absence of the inner membrane, commonly called parchment, which is found on most varieties when the bean begins to form. White American bean, slightly elongated, small, very productive, good eaten dry. Another rather arbitrary division, based on the use of beans in cooking, divides these vegetables into three series: shelling beans, those best eaten dry; green beans, those best eaten green; snap beans, those used with pod and bean. All beans, with a few exceptions, can be eaten green, just as the grain of most of them can be eaten dry. Some varieties are prized for the delicacy of their pods alone. We advise both the amateur and the horticulturist to try every variety they can get their hands on; it's a very easy thing to do; by planting a single clump of either the dwarf or the pole variety, you can explore its qualities. In years of famine, they have been a great resource for populations reduced to poverty; moreover, they are a very nutritious and healthy food. LETTUCE. Lettuces are grown in good free-range garden soil. Spring lettuces are sown in February or March, to be transplanted in April; summer lettuces are sown from April 15 to July, to be transplanted successively every two weeks and supplied throughout the season. Winter lettuces are sown from August 15th to September 15th, and at different times, to be transplanted in November and spend the winter in place under a blanket of leaves, which are removed during the thaws. Cutting lettuce is sown on a warm or cold bed under a frame in December and January; it is never transplanted. In February and March, the same variety is sown on walls facing east or south, either on a bed or in the ground; this lettuce is sown very thickly and harvested as soon as it has four leaves. Lettuce is transplanted using a planter, without pressing the soil too hard against the root or covering the heart of the plant, which should only be level with the surface of the soil. They are planted in staggered rows, the larger ones at Om, 40, the medium ones at Om, 30, and the smaller ones at Om, 20 apart. Lettuces grow quickly and with difficulty in warm, light, dry soil; in cold, clayey soils, they grow too slowly; consequently, good, free-flowing, soft soil, as we have already said, is best and most suitable. For all plantings made in the first heat of spring and summer, choose the evening and water immediately after transplanting. For spring planting, as long as the nights are still cold and the soil is not sufficiently moist, water in the morning or around mid-day. As for the choice of varieties, which are very numerous and rather poorly described or determined, it will be made according to what the gardener finds most advantageous, giving preference to those that leave the ground free as soon as possible for other crops. There are three types of lettuce, each containing a large number of varieties: A. Spring lettuces with round heads: Dolphin lettuce, one of the best spring lettuces; flattened, large, full, tender head; black seed. Cordon rouge lettuce; small; blond-green leaves; red-tinted top; white seed. Lettuce small, blond, early; rises quickly. B. Summer lettuces. Lettuce blonde de Versailles, tender, difficult to set seed; likes light soil and frequent watering; white seed. Turkish lettuce, large, white-green leaves; very large head; one of the best summer lettuces; black seed. The following summer lettuces are also grown: blond stock lettuce, Berni lettuce, royal lettuce, Maltese lettuce, Batavia lettuce, Batavia cabbage lettuce, etc. The last two are very favorable to watering. The last two are very favorable for farmers' gardens, and can even be grown in fields, because they are not difficult on the quality of the soil, while at the same time they make excellent food for pigs, who are very eager to eat them. Lazy blond lettuce: produces large heads; very slow to bolt. Beautiful and good lettuce, old but excellent variety; sometimes huge heads; brittle and very tender. The new varieties on the market as Victoria lettuce and Bath brown lettuce are worth spreading. C. Winter lettuces. Crepe or small crepe lettuce, small; it apples little, and comes well under cloche in winter. Small black lettuce, a sub-variety of the previous one; comes under frames or cloches. Morine lettuce, greener than the next; lasts longer; white seed. Passion lettuce, apples around Holy Week: hence its name; copper-colored, dotted with reddish spots. Gotte lettuce, of which two varieties are grown, one with a black seed and the other with a white seed, larger than the small black one and less pale green. Suitable for bedding. D. Roman lettuces. These lettuces are distinguished from head lettuces by their shape; their leaves are elongated, narrow at the base, broad and almost always rounded at the tips; they are not curled or blistered and do not lie flat on the ground, but stand upright and do not nod. Almost all varieties need to be tied like endives in order to tenderize and etiolate. The main ones are : Early spring and summer green romaine, very large; not very difficult on the quality of the soil; the seed is black. Romaine maraichère d'été, long, dark-green leaves; the least delicate in terms of soil; successful in all seasons, it is the most widely cultivated. Romaine blonde de Brunoy, green-yellow, more tender than the next, but more prone to bolting; white seed. Romaine grise du printemps, not successful in summer or autumn. Red romaine, red-tinted outer leaves; best in autumn; black seed. Romaine lettuces, also known simply as romaine, chicory or elongated lettuce, are all worthy of cultivation. The English and Germans also grow other varieties, such as bourg, etc. The cultivation of head lettuces is applicable in all respects to romaine lettuces, except that they need to be tied like endives, and some varieties are particularly suitable for forced cultivation. - See this cultivation. Winter romaine lettuces are followed by winter lettuces, such as passion lettuce, morine, petite crêpe, etc.; after these come lettuces for cutting. Small, early varieties are generally preferred for this purpose. Chicory lettuce, with its kinky leaves, and spinach lettuce, with its lobed, incised leaves, are particularly recommended for the same purpose. Spring and summer salads follow. Lettuce (lactuca sativa, L.) is a member of the semi-flowering family; its native soil is unknown to us. It has been grown in Belgium for over two centuries. It is widely consumed throughout Europe every year. It is a healthy vegetable, slightly sleep-inducing. Today, a medicine known as thridace is prepared from its milky juice; it shares the soporific properties of opium. MACHE. Mâche, doucette, blanchette, poule-grasse, salade de chanoine, salade de blé, oreille-de-lièvre, are all synonyms for a small salad native to Belgium. A small, low-growing annual, it is common in fields and can be cultivated in 21 11 vegetable gardens, where it becomes a little stronger and is easier to collect when grouped in a small space. Two varieties of this plant are known: Italian lamb's lettuce, which is stronger in all its proportions and has slightly hairy leaves; it is less prized than the common variety. The latter is more tender, with smaller, narrower leaves. Lamb's lettuce can be sown from August 15 to October 15, in well-tilled, well-amended soil. In poor soil, the plant is less tender and sometimes tough. As the seed is very fine, it is covered very little, if at all. All it requires for cultivation is weeding. Sowings in August, September and October successively produce lamb's lettuce that can be harvested throughout the winter and spring. To harvest the seeds, the yellowing plants are shaken on a cloth, then

After a few days, they are shaken again to obtain the rest of the seed, which will keep for four to five years. BUT. Corn wouldn't fit in here, if it hadn't long since acquired the right of ownership in many country gardens, where it doesn't look too bad. In fact, this is how a plant sometimes becomes a field crop. We know that the potato, before becoming generally cultivated, was first used in many gardens as an ornamental plant, and then, long afterwards, as a field crop. Corn doesn't always do well in our climate: sown late, it fails to ripen its seeds; sown too early, it sometimes freezes. If its yield were as certain as that of wheat, corn would be the equivalent of this precious cereal; it would compensate most fully for the cost of cultivation. It likes light, sandy, warm and very fertile soil; it needs a lot of fertilizer. Sow as soon as frosts are no longer a threat, in April, or even at the beginning of the month, to ensure ripe seeds. Corn withstands a slight degree of cold and grows again in good soil, if the first leaf has been destroyed. It is sown in rows spaced from Om, 75 to Om, 90. In the rows, seeds placed in twos or threes 0m, 30 apart should be lightly covered. During its vegetation, it requires no care other than weeding and hoeing, then to be strongly ridged when it is 0°, 50 high. All overabundant plants, superfluous shoots and later overabundant ears are removed, leaving only two or three of the strongest. Corn is harvested when the husk is dry and the kernel hard; the cobs are removed and dried in the granary or in a dry, well-ventilated place. Ordinary corn or corn with large yellow kernels yields a lot of produce; quarantine corn is smaller, yields less, but vegetates more quickly and comes into Belgium better than large corn. As a forage plant, corn deserves to be widespread in every respect. Horned cattle are very fond of it. To this end, it is sown from April 15 to June, either broadcast or in rows closer together than usual. It is cut above the roots as soon as it begins to flower, or before. It is cut with a chopper and fed with chopped straw to cows, etc. It is a good successor to clover, potatoes, rapeseed and beet. It originates from Peru and is widely cultivated in America; the Mexicans trade in it extensively; it seems to have come to us from Turkey. It seems to have come to us from Turkey, so everyone knows that it still bears the name of Turkish wheat. There are several varieties, differing only in the color of the grain, which is yellow, red, purple, white, variegated and variously marbled. At the time of writing, seeds of a corn from Upper Peru are being imported into Belgium, which the introducer calls Cusco corn. The seeds are a beautiful white, flattened and large: at first glance, they could be mistaken for bog beans. They appear to belong to a variety, or rather a species, that is very robust in every respect. In Bolivia, the plant is cultivated on the slopes of high mountains, where the climate is perhaps harsher than in Belgium. According to the introducer, who himself brought the seeds to our country, Cusco maize is of immense value in field cultivation. Let us mention here the introducer, Mr. Mariano de Rivero, ambassador of the Peruvian Republic to the Belgian government. Perhaps our grateful country will one day name this corn zea mariano de Rivero. 18 CULTIVATION. The onion requires light, loose soil, especially containing a mixture of consumed manure left over from previous crops. So, when we say light soil, we don't mean sandy soil that is often thin, but soil that is either clayey or sandy, improved by successive fertilizations, from which nourishing juices remain and which have made it loose. If you have land in the conditions we have just described, the success of a good onion crop depends on good soil preparation. Before winter, the land is ploughed with a spade, and half-consumed cow manure is ploughed in at the same time. We recommend half-consumed manure, because onions, like all bulbous plants, fear new and still fermenting manure. Fifteen or eight days before sowing, to allow the soil to settle properly, we give the second and final ploughing. Onions are sown at the end of February in light soils, and in March in heavy soils. If the soil to be sown is light, once it has been suitably levelled, it should be plumbed a little with the back of the spade, the seed sown abundantly, the rake passed lightly in the direction of the length of the planks and only once, as one passes the harrow over a sown field, so that the rake does not return to the same spot and the seeds sown are not piled up, as happens when the rake makes these movements11. movements that spoil the proper distribution of seeds on the ground. After lightly harrowing with the rake, cover the beds with a layer of potting soil about 0m, 007 thick. This layer of loam could be given a thickness of Om,03 or Om,07, but then it would have to be scattered over the beds beforehand, and sown on. In strong soils, you won't behave quite the same way. It is bad practice to combine these soils in minute detail, since the rains then pound and harden them, and the hailstorms complete the process of rendering them almost sterile, by forming a crust that splits and cracks; on these soils, distributing a layer of loam is infinitely favorable; consequently, if you had no loam, you would sow on rough ploughing in heavy soils and harrow lightly with the rake. The above principles should be clearly understood with regard to light and compact soils. When the seed has risen and the young plant is fairly firm, weed and thin, then water to firm the soil around the roots. The most suitable distance to leave for onions, in all directions, is Om,07 to 0m,09. Breaking the leaves on onions is a pretty useless operation: when done while they are still growing, it is harmful; when they are nearing maturity, the leaves lie down on their own; the only time this operation might be appropriate is when winter is approaching and, consequently, ripening needs to be accelerated. As soon as the leaves have dried, the bulbs are harvested; they are laid out for about ten days in a garden alley, or under a shed where the wind circulates, then taken to the attic; a fortnight later, they are cleaned of roots and leaves; they are laid out next to each other in a place sheltered from the cold, or covered with dry leaves. As for the seedbeds, choose the largest and most beautiful onions. Plant them in the ground in February, 0.25 m apart in all directions and at such a depth that the top of the bulb emerges slightly from the soil. As soon as the fistulous stems go to seed, surround them with stakes, otherwise they will fall over under their own weight, or be broken by strong winds. Don't wait to harvest the seeds until the triangular capsules enclosing them have dried out. As soon as the seed is black, it is ripe, or at least ripe enough to be harvested and fully ripen in a dry, airy place; if you wait any longer, much of it will be lost. The seed heads should be cut with Om, 30 of stem. Once dried out, the seeds are beaten and stored in a dry place. Their germination period is two years. DETAILS AND DISTINCTIVE CHARACTERISTICS The onion (allium cœpa, L.), a member of the Liliaceae family, has several varieties. As far as we know, not all of them have yet been tried in Belgium. The best-known varieties here are dark red, pale red and yellow; the latter is valued because it keeps better in winter than the others, although all are fairly easy to store. Next come white onions, Spanish onions, Portuguese onions, Deptfort onions, Strasbourg onions and so on. Under the name of potato onion, we grow a variety that reproduces from cloves growing around the main bulb. These cloves are separated in winter and planted in early spring. Another variety, the Egyptian onion, which has been cultivated in our country for a long time, produces bulblets on its stalk and also multiplies through these. The latter two belong to warmer climates and do not produce as perfect a product here as in their native soil; we do not recommend their cultivation. The white or spring onion is an excellent variety; it has a milder flavor and is more frost-resistant than the others. Sow from August 1st to around the 15th of the same month, covering the seeds only with a 1 or 2 cm layer of compost. This onion should be sown very close together, to be planted out at the end of October or in November, leaving a distance of Om.07 to Om.09 between plants on well-ploughed, leaded and terra-cotta-coated soil. When this transplanting is done, the young plants are about the height of Om, 15. The ends of the leaves should not be cut off, only the tips of their roots pinched a little, then transplanted with the planter at the same depth they occupied before transplanting. The seedling can also be planted out in spring, but sow in the second half of August. For our climate, it's always wise to cover these young onions with leaves during severe cold and uncover them during thaws. White onions planted in October, November or March will be large enough to be used in May or June, leaving the ground free for other crops such as potatoes, Savoy cabbage, green cabbage, endives, carrots, yellow and red onions; Madeira onions, which grow to a considerable size; Nocera onions, brought in from Italy, are white, small and of very good quality. We draw special attention to the quality of fertilizer used in England, where horticulturalists are very keen on growing onions. After ploughing the land with great care, they spread potting soil over the beds, sow the seeds and then cover them by hand with soil taken from the paths between the beds. For many years they grow onions in the same place, with no significant difference in yield. This is hardly surprising; the plants find ever-new nourishment in this way, and their cultivation in the same place could, without differing much, continue in perpetuity. Moreover, we consider this method to be very good. This consists of a mixture of butcher's blood, quicklime and a small quantity of free earth. This well-mixed compost is piled up a year in advance; it is used as a dry powder and spread on the soil at the same time as the seed. We also recommend, and we know from experience that this fertilizer is excellent, the use of clay rubble from thatched cottages, etc. This clay, mixed with water, can be used as a fertilizer. This clay, mixed with liquid manure and sheep dung, and piled up for three to six months, spreads over the beds and gives the onions a beautiful vegetation. What we did ourselves, many years ago, was to spread chicken droppings to a thickness of about 1 centimeter between young onions the size of a goose feather pipe; we have never seen bigger onions than after using this fertilizer. Pigeon droppings would undoubtedly produce the same effect, but as their strength is proportionately greater, the quantity to be used should be a little less. SORREL. Sorrel is a perennial, indigenous plant of the polygon family. It produces pleasantly acidic leaves from the root collar all year round. It enhances the bland taste of some other vegetables, such as spinach, and at the same time corrects the greasiness of certain dishes, such as eels. Sorrel is very easy to grow: the commercial horticulturist, as well as the amateur, almost never plants or sows it other than in borders, next to beds or squares. Once planted, which is done by splitting off the plants, it can remain for twelve to fifteen years; however, we don't recommend leaving it beyond five or six years without renewing it. During the summer, sorrel needs no care other than to be weeded, and to have the stems cut back when they show a disposition to climb. In winter, the soil and plants are fertilized with horse manure or compost. Leaves do not freeze quickly; however, this sometimes happens. To get some in winter, just cover them with litter and uncover them when the thaw comes. We grow: Belleville sorrel, broad-leafed, not very acidic; - petite eccille, the most acidic; - Holland sorrel, broad-leafed, the best. All species and varieties of sorrel can be grown in any kind of soil and in any kind of exposure; in the north and in the shade, their acidity is less pronounced than in the south and in bright sunshine. PERSIL. CULTIVATION. Parsley, a seasoning plant, thrives in loose, oily soil, and although it thrives in any kind of exposure, as a southern European plant it prefers a southern exposure. It can be sown from March to August and throughout the summer, in beds, borders or rays. Seeds should be covered with only 0m,002 of soil; they are quite fine, and we know that any fine seed, if it is too well covered, will not germinate. They must be kept wet from the very first days of sowing, until they have acquired a certain strength: seeds take thirty to forty days to germinate. The first sowings in spring and the last ones in autumn should be at the foot of a wall and facing south. By the second year, the plant has gone to seed; however, it can be kept for at least three years, if the stems are cut off as soon as they come up. Parsley is rare on Belgian markets in winter. Some people dry the leaves in summer, then store them in closed vases or jars. Leaves preserved in this way are inert and almost tasteless. All aromatic plants, more or less 1, owe their aroma and virtue to a volatile oil, of which almost nothing remains after the plant has dried. The plant itself is not very delicate; it doesn't freeze; its roots brave the cold; but the part you need, the leaf, freezes. Parsley can be stored very easily under a layer of leaves, the thickness of which is increased according to the intensity of the cold. Under this layer, you'll always find healthy leaves suitable for culinary use. All the more reason to keep it well under glass. We also recommend, especially for small households, to sow it in a terrine or flowerpot filled with potting soil and to keep this terrine or pot in the house. It goes without saying that parsley is discovered covered in leaves during the thaw. Parsley stems go to seed in May; the seeds ripen in August. When half the seeds appear ripe, the whole plant is cut and dried in the sun, so that the seeds cannot be lost: they fall out as they ripen. DETAILS AND DISTINCTIVE CHARACTERISTICS Common parsley (apium petroselinum, Linn.) belongs to the Umbelliferae family. The stem, two to three feet high, is glabrous, ridged and stalked; its leaves are twice winged; the upper leaflets linear; the lower cuneate; terminal umbels. Parsley is even easier to confuse with some native poisonous plants than chervil, since hemlock and little hemlock resemble parsley more than chervil in habit. - See this last plant on page 23. Parsley is native to Sardinia. There are several varieties and sub-varieties, such as: curly parsley, the very curly dwarf parsley, the broad-leafed parsley, whose fleshy root is used in cooking in Belgium and Holland; Naples parsley, with large ribs, or parsley-celeriac, which is more robust in all its parts and whose ribs have turned white and are eaten like celery; its cultivation is also the same as that of celery. Parsley grown by gardeners around large cities can provide an excellent market-gardening trade item in winter. For this purpose, it should be grown under glass frames, and sown lightly, in the first fortnight of July, in light soil. The seeds should be properly watered every day; although this watering should be repeated daily, it may not be enough in the middle of the scorching summer heat: in this case, the seedling should be covered with a layer of moss one to two fingers thick, which should be wetted once or twice a day, until the seeds emerge; the moss should then be removed, so don't neglect to look after it from the twenty-fifth day of sowing. PHYTOLACCA. The American grape, ten-stamens phytolacca, phytolacca decandra, L., is a large perennial plant from North America. Its stems rise to 2, 3 and 4 meters in height; they are reddish, as are 2. 12 the leaves, which are broad, oval, lanceolate and pointed. This plant is cultivated in some gardens to protect young seedlings from the sun. Creoles eat its leaves, just as Europeans eat spinach, and it is a very valuable food for negroes. The same cannot be said of phytolacca esculenta. This new vegetable, with the slightly peppery flavor of its leaves, is considered excellent by some and not very pleasant by others. What is certain is that it is less bland than spinach. Sow in a bed in February or March; transplant in April, about Om.50 apart and staggered. The plant likes oily soil. CULTIVATED PICRIDIE. Picridie cultivée, terre crépie, terra crepola, picridium vulgare, Desf. of the Compositae family, grows spontaneously in France, along roadsides, particularly near Montpellier; it was cultivated in Italy long ago. M. Vilmorin, a French horticulturist, spread it to the gardens of northern France, where it is now quite common. This easy-to-cultivate annual likes sandy soil. From the end of March to April, it is sown as a broadcast crop or in fairly tight rows. Young plants, used like endives, can be cut several times and grow back abundantly. 28 Soil preparation for leeks is the same as for onions. The soil must be fertile, loose and smoky from the previous year. Fertilizers suitable for onions are also suitable for leeks. Some gardeners who deal with the cultivation of this plant speak of fertilizers with a sort of aversion, as if this exceptional vegetable didn't need them; they're wrong! As a general rule, no plant can grow well without fertilizer; every organized being needs nourishment. Leek seeds can be sown quite thickly, within reach of the land on which they are to be planted. Sow in February or March, in rows or broadcast. The young plant needs only to be weeded, hoeed and watered in good time. Around mid-June, it is planted at Om, 18 apart in all directions and at a depth of Om, 10 to Om, 15, depending on the size of the plant, which must be at least the size of a goose feather pipe. As far as possible, choose rainy, overcast weather for transplanting. Once the plant has been pulled out, the lower parts of the fibrous roots are removed and the tops of the leaves cut off. A seedling is placed in each hole made with the planter, and without plunging the soil with this instrument, a generous watering is given to draw the soil into the holes and close them up without the need for further firming. During the summer, water frequently, and in September, interrupt the circulation of the sap in the leaves so that it moves towards the roots or, to put it better, towards the tuberous bulge above the roots themselves, which is the leek or edible part. To achieve this, the leaves of each plant are tied together with a simple knot. Others cut them off once or twice during the autumn; we don't like the latter procedure: strong mutilations are rarely beneficial to the plants. To preserve leeks, we lay the plants down to the leaves, one beside the other, in shallow trenches that we cover with litter or leaves during the frosts. This is done in November, when the weather is dry, and the leek will keep until May. In the same month, each plant sprouts a single stem rising from Om.60 to 1m.20 in height, ending in an onion-like head. As soon as the capsules open and show their black seeds, the stems are cut, leaving them Om,20 to Om,30 long; they are tied in bundles and dried on a cloth in the sun, or hung in a shed, with the precaution of putting paper, cloth or something else underneath, to catch any seeds that fall out. Those that remain in the capsules are left there until it's time to use them; they keep better there, and their germinative capacity lasts for two years. Leeks can be left to grow upwards, reserving a corner of the plantation, or, better still, they can be planted in March, choosing the best and biggest plants; they are placed at a slightly shorter distance than that indicated for onion seedbeds, since, as we have said, each leek plant produces only one stem, whereas onions produce from one to five stems per individual. Animal fertilizers, especially chicken or pigeon droppings, etc., sown on the soil in leek plantations, are suitable. We've also found it very easy to make furrows with the hoe, dragging it between the rows as we walk backwards; we fill these furrows or little trenches with dry or liquid slurry; we leave everything in this state for two weeks, then, by hoeing, we combine the soil as before. Leeks (allium porrum, L.) belong to the Liliaceae family. It grows spontaneously in Switzerland and France. Its cultivation is not very fortunate and, if well cared for, the product is quite profitable for the gardener-merchant. It is widely consumed in large cities, while country folk use up a small supply every year. There are two known varieties of leek: the short, fat leek from Rouen, known as the monster leek, and the long leek, which yields more. PEAS. CULTIVATION. Peas, which have long been grown in Belgium and other European countries, have yet to be subjected to a specific cultivation system. Even renowned growers say that peas should not be grown on recently-smoked soil or fields. - This is true, and we agree wholeheartedly with their 12. -4 their opinion, as regards fresh, unfermented, urine-soaked manure. But on the other hand, let's not forget to say: Peas want substantial soil, where they can find abundant humus or nourishing juices to make them vegetate perfectly. Consequently, loose, fertile soil that has been well smoked in previous years is ideal for peas. They also thrive in slightly calcareous soil; if the fertilizers previously applied to the land contained lime or calcareous salts, such as sulfate, subcarbonate or lime phosphate, they will find excellent nourishment. Wood ash is another suitable fertilizer for this type of plant. In humus- or loam-rich soil, peas can withstand the intense heat that almost always kills them in walled city gardens, where the sun's rays shine directly on them through reverberation. There, they are often yellowed from the stem and in a state of complete decay at or shortly after flowering. It should be noted that in suitable soil, as we have just mentioned, they should not be sown or planted as thickly as in poor or barren soil, where the plant acquires little volume. Peas should not be grown two years in a row on the same plot; there must be an interval of several years before they can be planted again in the same place. Peas are first planted in November on south-facing slopes, using early species in rays or pockets. November 25 is the day usually taken in our various provinces for these first sowings: without attaching great importance to this date, we are far from blaming the habit of ancient gardeners with regard to the fixing of days for sowing or planting; it may have its disadvantages, but it results in some order in the work, and then country people find it a certain ease; their agricultural work often coincides with those of gardening and sometimes makes them neglect the latter. The other sowings take place consecutively, weather permitting, in December, January, February and so on. As soon as the first seedlings emerge from the ground, they are sown again, and in the same way throughout the spring and summer, providing an uninterrupted succession of pods to be picked from spring to autumn. The last sowings are of late varieties, such as Clamart peas, Marly peas, broad bean peas, giant peas, Norman peas, and especially wrinkled or Knight peas. Seedlings for autumn peas should never be of early varieties; these are only suitable for spring and summer; by autumn these varieties no longer knot, and give flowers without fruit. The rows are spaced Om, 25 apart; the tufts within the rows are planted at the same distance, or at 0m, 30 for the strongest and tallest species. The holes are opened with a hoe, small spade or hoe, and 6 to 10 seeds are sown in each hole, covered with Om.05 to 0m.08 of soil. Until harvest, the peas are cared for by breaking up any crust that may have formed on the surface of the planting beds, hoeing the plants when they are about Om,10 in height, and weeding and raking them. For the first seedlings, which are sown in late autumn and overwinter in the ground, Dutch peas and Michaux peas are the preferred varieties. Overwintering peas in the ground is not recommended for the commercial horticulturist in our country. If they are a few days earlier, they are not as productive as those sown in February, March and April. The late peas we mentioned above can only be sown in June, so that they can be harvested in the late season, towards winter. If you want larger yields from these peas and want to have them earlier, you should sow them in April, so that their ripening grain can be eaten dry in winter. Pea seeds should always be selected so that the pods closest to the ground are harvested. It's a good idea to let the seed ripen in one or more beds, depending on the size of the crop, so as to have a separate supply of seeds. Peas can be preserved in their pods or shelled; we prefer to shell them as soon as they are ripe and dry. It seems to us, although we're not quite sure, that bruchids attack them more strongly in the pods than without them. However, this insect particularly attacks the lobes or cotyledons, sparing the sprouts in most cases, so that worm-eaten peas sprout just as well as those that have remained intact. They retain their germination capacity for two years. DETAILS AND DISTINCTIVE CHARACTERISTICS Cultivated peas (pisum sativum, Linn.) belong to the natural legume family. Their fruit is called a legume or pod. Peas are therefore divided into three sections, according to their use in the domestic economy. Shelling peas are those whose valves are hard and lined with a membrane called parchment; these valves can only be used for cattle feed. - Snow peas are those that are eaten with or without pods; they are particularly useful for the staff of large farms; they produce a lot and don't need time to be shelled. - Dry shelled peas are particularly suitable for eating dry. They can also be shelled green, but it's a good idea to keep them for winter supplies, as they produce a lot and their very flaky grains soften perfectly when cooked, making excellent purées. The large green Norman pea is the best for this purpose, producing the most to be used dry. The most noteworthy varieties are: Pois Michaux, early, tender and sweet green; mediocre yield, white grain; Pois Michaux de Hollande, preferable to the previous variety, high yield, earlier. - Prince Albert pea: dwarf, eight days earlier than all the others, introduced from England in 1842. The English have strongly recommended it. - Pois crochu; not the earliest, but excellent, very sweet and very productive. - Pois de Marly, late, excellent, very productive. - Clamart pea, very good, best suited to very late harvests. - Knight's wrinkled pea has two varieties, one with a green grain, the other with a white grain. Both are very productive and of very good quality. - Turkish pea, very high, tender and sweet. - Sickle pea, very large and curved pod. - Waite's queen of the dwarf peace, very dwarf, reaches no more than six inches (0m, 18). marrow peace, dwarf, very full pods. - Princess Olga pea, early, high yielding. - Flacks duarf peas, productive, two to three feet tall. Chickpea (cicer arietinum, Linn.). The shape of the seed resembles that of a ram's head; hence the epithet or specific name of the plant. Chickpea seeds are also known as cicerelles, pesettes, garvances, from their Spanish name garbanzillo. This vegetable was highly esteemed by the Romans, and is still used today by the Spaniards. It has a pleasant taste both green and mashed. It is a healthy food, but not suitable for weak stomachs. PURSLANE. Purslane (portulaca oleracea, Linn.) is an annual plant of the Portulaceae family, brought to us from India. From the end of April to the end of summer, purslane is sown on potting soil mixed with the surface of the previously spaded ground. The very fine seeds are broadcast and do not need to be covered with soil. After sowing, the seeds are wetted to attach them to the soil. During the growing season, purslane is frequently wetted, making the leaves all the more tender. They are used in soups or steamed. A variety known as golden purslane, with 16 yellowish leaves, is more highly esteemed and more widely cultivated than the common green-leaved variety. The seeds are harvested as soon as the first capsules open; the plants are pulled out and dried on a sheet in the sun. Seeds kept in a dry place can be stored for nine or ten years. The germinative capacity of this plant's seeds is such that, once cultivated in a garden, the plant will return for a long series of years. To harvest its leaves in January and February, purslane is sown on a bed under a frame - see forced cultivation. WHITE QUINOA. White quinoa, anserine quinoa, chenopodium quinoa, Wildenow, is an annual plant of the Chenopoda family, excellent, very healthy and easy to digest. From April to July, it is sown in substantial soil that is damp rather than dry. Care should be taken to thin out the young plant, which spreads out and grows to a height of one or two meters. Growing in rows is preferable, as it makes it easier to keep the young plants at a suitable distance from one another, 0.30 to 0.40 m apart in all directions. Quinoa seeds keep for two years. Its leaves, unctuous and as wide as the hand, acquire greater width by means of topping, which should be carried out when the plant is about Om,40 in height; it is these leaves that are used; they exude vesicular globules and have this property in common with a species indigenous to our country: chenopodium bonus Ilenricus, Linn. Europe in 1779. Its cultivation was abandoned, and the plant lost to our gardens reappeared in England in 1822. Widely cultivated in lower Peru and on the high plateaus, its floury seeds constitute, alongside potatoes, the main food of the people; but cultivation has declined considerably since fine cereals were introduced from Europe. Quinoa is often confused with other species of anserine, notably with Schroder's chenopodium rubricaule. Kunth, based on specimens found in the herbarium of the famous travelers de Humboldt and Bonpland, speaks of two chenopods, one with a red stem and the other with a green stem: these plants, of Peruvian or Chilean origin, have also been mistaken, though perhaps wrongly, for white quinoa. RHUBARBS. Rhubarb, rheum, has been used as an edible plant in England for many years, and among the most widely cultivated are: currant rhubarb, early Elford rhubarb, late Ayton rhubarb, Nepaul rhubarb, wavy rhubarb and a hybrid that resembles Myatt rhubarb. The petioles and young etiolated leaves (1) are offered, even in winter, on the markets of the cities of Great Britain; in spring, gardeners continue to provide for consumption an immense quantity of bunches of white petioles (tails) which (1) We point out that the herbaceous parts of rhubarb are in no way purgative; the root alone enjoys this property. (Author's note.) They also make excellent pies. Hybrid rhubarb and Elford rhubarb are used in particular for this purpose. Also, under the name of rhufleurs and as a substitute for cauliflower, unhatched pompons with their stalks still tender are served on the best tables (1). These perennial plants of the polygon family, mostly native to the colder regions of our hemisphere, require no cultivation care: planted 1.40 m apart because of the size of their leaves, all that's needed is to hoe them in spring and bleach their petioles by buttage. Propagation takes place in the spring by root bursts or seeds, which should be sown immediately when mature, although they keep for two years. TETRAGON. Tetragonia (Tetragonia expansa), annual plant from New Zealand. It is already widespread in our gardens. It contributes to the taste and color of spinach. Its stem, as the specific name implies, is spread out over the ground and occupies a large space, so plants should be at least Om.50 apart. Sow in April or May, on potting soil. As soon as the plants are sufficiently developed, the ends of the stems are cut off along with the leaves; they are sure to grow back. These leaves and twigs are prepared in the same way as spinach. (1) The method of rhubarb stripping is not absolute; however, we recommend it because it tenderizes the plant while removing some of its acidity. MARKET GARDENING. 2. 13 NATURAL CROPS. ROOT VEGETABLES. BETTERAVE. CULTIVATION. We are talking here only about varieties grown in gardens; the others are part of field cultivation and are described in agricultural treatises. Beet thrives best in clean, loose, fertile, deeply tilled soil. It also thrives in sandy and clayey soil; however, it should be noted that, in good free soil, the roots grow larger than in light or sandy soil. They are either sown in situ or transplanted: in gardens, transplanting is generally used. For sowing, choose a well-tilled bed with good exposure, and sow from April 15 to May 15. If sown too early, beet rises and the roots are lost. Transplanting is done in May or June, with plants the size of a little finger, at a distance of Om.50 for the largest species and Om.35 for the smallest, in all directions. If the weather is dry, the soil is lightly tilled, or the roots are soaked in cow dung mixed with manure water, and planted immediately. When planting, take particular care not to turn the tip of the young root over in the hole. Once the beet has recovered, it requires no care other than weeding and hoeing; it is very resistant to drought and almost never needs watering. It serves well as an in-between plant for pole beans. Beet should not be thinned out: this is a bad practice, and instead of increasing the yield, it only reduces it. Harvesting takes place in October, when the leaves are removed without cutting anything from the crown, and fed to livestock. The roots are placed in a frost-free place, where they can be stored until June. In March or April, plant healthy, well-formed beet seedlings 0.90 m apart. As soon as the seeds are ripe, cut off the branches with the ripest seeds and dry them in the sun or under a shed. Seeds keep for two to three years. DETAILS AND DISTINCTIVE CHARACTERISTICS Beetroot (Beta vulgaris, Linn.) is a biennial, native to southern Europe. It has been known in Belgium since 1600. In France, beet cultivation now covers 55,000 hectares or so. Beet cultivation has expanded considerably in Belgium since sugar refiners learned how to cultivate it better and extract more product from it. Four varieties of beet are grown in gardens for food use: the common large red, the Castelnaudary small red, the common yellow and the Castelnaudary yellow. The petite rouge is the best for culinary use, being more delicate than the others. When grown for livestock, as is often the case in farmers' gardens, it is better to use the variety known as disette or pink beet, or the white beet from Silesia, which is the sugar beet. The former is the largest and produces a lot; sugar beet is the most nourishing. The plant is too well known to be described in detail here. CARROTS. GROWING. Carrots thrive in clean, soft, sandy soil. The soil must be deeply ploughed. New fertilizer is harmful to this root; fertilizer applied the previous year, or at the latest the previous autumn, is preferable to recent fertilizer. In the case of recent manure, the roots are often forked, affected by rust spots, and their flavor is less sweet. The first sowings begin in February, and continue over the following months until June. For the first sowings, the species known as toupie de Hollande should be preferred, as it is earlier and has a good 16 taste as long as it is yellow. It is also suitable for seedlings sown in September, which produce in spring and early summer. Earlier in the summer, towards autumn and winter, the pale yellow or white Flanders variety should be preferred; it is mild and sweet, whereas the Dutch toupie, which is always very good in spring, becomes pungent and therefore unappetizing. Seedlings are quite dense; it's easy to thin and place young carrots at a suitable distance, starting with Om.06 for market garden varieties. Continue thinning as needed, so that by the end they are spaced Om, 15 or Om 20 apart. In sandy soils, after sowing, lightly harrow with a rake and press the soil with the back of the spade. In heavy soils, after sowing, and without using the rake, cover the seeds with a light layer of potting soil of about Om, 01. This cover has the double advantage of providing nourishment for the young seedling and preventing the formation of crusts on the soil, always so pernicious to the success of crops. Seedlings need to be weeded first, then thinned and watered if necessary. When growing this plant in rows, hoe often. This operation considerably benefits the roots. Sowing in rows is rarely done except on large farms, and the crop has flourished since this change. Carrots are very prone to shrivelling. This is the name given to a disease that affects them as soon as they emerge from the ground: they turn yellow and dis13. appear, without any definite cause. We are inclined to believe that it is the cold that affects them in this way in their early youth, producing a kind of stasis in the circulatory vessels. What is even more detrimental is a species of spider that attacks and devours them when they are very young. To get rid of this enemy, we recommend drenching the plants with an infusion of soot. Carrot seeds are only really good for two years; they still germinate after three or four years, but many are missing. To obtain good seed, we advise the grower to provide for it himself, to take care to choose the most beautiful roots as seed-bearers, to entrust them to the open ground as early as February, and to harvest the strongest umbels, whose seeds are ripe in August-September. Carrots harvested in November or December can be stored in a cellar, vegetable greenhouse or other frost-free location. After cutting off the leaves near the collar, the roots are pulled in and bedded in sand. They should be given air when the temperature permits. Although carrots are quite resistant to frosts, even slightly severe ones, those that are to be kept in the ground should be covered with litter or, better still, dry leaves. Under this last cover, seedlings can be overwintered and planted before winter at the desired distance (Om, 90). In this case, the seedlings are stronger and healthier than those kept in the cellar. If carrots were to be sown in large numbers, they would require a lot of covers and a lot of labor; it would therefore be easier and more economical to overwinter them in close rows, taking care to remove the cover whenever the temperature is mild. DETAILS AND DISTINCTIVE CHARACTERISTICS Carrots (Daucus carota, Linn.), members of the Umbelliferae family, are indigenous to Europe. It is derived from the wild carrot, which grows abundantly in fields and meadows. The varieties produced by cultivation today are quite numerous; we will mention only the most cultivated: the early Dutch spinach; short, reddish-yellow root, obtuse cone shape; it is the best for early spring sowing, as well as for being forced. Also known as rouge courte. - Red long, a variety of the previous one, with the same taste and color; more productive, but perhaps a little less early. - Spanish violet, very sweet; sown early in spring, it rises quickly; it does not keep well in winter. - The very pale yellow carrots, known as blanches in some places and which are none other than the yellow Flanders carrot or varieties thereof, are also very good, productive and sweet; they keep very late. For field cultivation, the following varieties are preferred: - Alteringham carrot, sweet, very large; - Brunswick carrot, long, red; - Breteuil white carrot, green-necked carrot and Vosges carrot. They are used as livestock feed. We have already mentioned the advantages of growing this root vegetable in rows. However, in gardens, the space between rows should not be Om,55 to Om,60, as for carrots in large-scale cultivation, but only Om,15 to Om,20. This distance would allow ploughing with great ease, using the small hoe or the serfouette. In all cases, the width of the beds should be such that the middle can be easily reached for weeding, hoeing, etc. To thin carrots, we never wait until they are edible; we start this operation as soon as they have four leaves, in addition to the cotyledons or seminal leaves. CHERVIS. Chervis, also known as cherul, chirouis, giroles, berle chervis, is Sium sisarum, Linn. of the Umbelliferae family. Chervis seed is sown in March, in rays or broadcast, in good, loose, deeply spaded soil. This plant likes damp rather than dry, sandy rather than clayey soil, because in heavy soil that has not been loosened with compost, as well as in dry or stony soil, the roots remain small, forked and woody. Frequent watering is highly profitable for this plant, which must also be weeded, hoeed and thinned. The roots, which are fleshy and sweet, are used in the same way as scorzonera and are preserved in winter in exactly the same way. They are white, covered with a russet film, from Om,18 to 0m,25 long, and from Om,020 to Om,025 in diameter. In the same year as sowing, the plant produces a stem that rises from Om, 60 to Om 90; but care must be taken to cut it off before it reaches this height, and therefore before flowering time, as the great development of the stem would prevent the root from acquiring a suitable volume. Chervis is a perennial plant and appears to have originated in China; it was introduced into Europe very long ago, and Pliny reports that the Emperor Tiberius was so fond of the plant that he demanded it as an annual tribute from the Germans. The seeds keep for three years. - Intelligent horticulturists recommend sowing chervis seeds as soon as they reach maturity. In this case, they should be planted out in September and the young plants transplanted in spring. NAVETS. The soil has such a strong influence on the quality of turnips that it is often enough to change the variety. Turnips grow best in light, sandy soils. Rarely is this plant grown in gardens. Markets are supplied with roots from the surrounding countryside. So it would be very difficult to obtain even passable turnips in walled or tree-planted gardens. As a market-garden plant, we would hardly need to mention the turnip if we didn't intend to make known the usefulness of using the ribs of its leaves in the domestic economy. Turnip seeds are sown fairly thickly, in spring or autumn. In autumn, peas, Savoy cabbage, potatoes, etc. can be sown afterwards. The young plants on these previously smoked soils develop rapidly; they can't spread out wide, being too close together; they spin and give almost dreite leaves. When these leaves are Om,30 to 0m,45 long, they can be used to great advantage as a vegetable. To this end, the plants are pulled up by the bootful, the undeveloped roots are cut off and fed to livestock, then the leafy parts are removed by sliding them between the fingers, and the ribs are cut together into pieces of Om,005 to Om,010. They are then prepared in the same way as green cabbage, with or without potatoes. This process of using turnip leaf petioles is not new to some parts of our country, while in others it is not practiced at all, and is even completely unknown. These same ribs, arranged as we have just said, can be candied like sauerkraut, and come in very handy as winter provisions for farms and large establishments. For the latter use, sow in August and September. The varieties that provide the best roots for cooking are: Freneuse turnip, saulieu, petit berlin; their roots are rounded; the plants are known as dry turnips. In strong soils, they completely lose their good qualities. We'd also like to mention the Schaerbeek turnip, the Tilsond turnip and the red May turnip, an early variety; these are sown from the first fine days of spring to harvest the roots in May: they are yellowish inside, of medium size and without pungency. Yellow turnips, which are beginning to spread in Belgium, are very useful. Other varieties with large roots, such as gros long d'Alsace, blanc plat, blanc long, etc., are absolutely part of mainstream cultivation and cannot be dealt with here. Turnip seedlings should be sown, if possible, in overcast or rainy weather. If the weather is dry, it should be watered; in this case, the seeds germinate more quickly and are less in danger of being eaten by flea beetles, the same insect that so disastrously attacks cabbage seedlings. To reduce its ravages, sprinkle the young plants every morning with wood ash and soot, until it is destroyed or disappears. Turnip (brassica napus, Linn.) is a biennial plant of the cruciferous family. Turnips should not be left in flower next to cabbages intended for seed harvesting. The turnip, belonging to the cabbage genus, fertilizes the cabbage and is fertilized in turn, producing hybridization. OLLUCO. Olluco (ullucus tuberosus, Caldas) is a tuberous, almost creeping plant. Its flat-lying stems take root at every point where they touch the ground; this would provide an excellent means of propagation, were it not for the fact that the tubers make multiplication extremely easy. The leaves are large, thick and fleshy. Flowers are small, greenish-yellow and appear in spikes in the axils of the leaves. Tubers are yellow and resemble the potato known as goat's horn. The plant is widely cultivated in Upper Peru, where it is known as oca quina. The name oca is also given to two species of oxalis, notably oxalis tuberosa. In Peru, the plant is grown in the same way as potatoes, i.e. in furrows, into which the tuber is thrown with fertilizer. It is planted from July 25 to August 10 and harvested at the end of April. Indians use tubers too small for consumption as seed. Recently imported to Europe from Quito, olluco is still only available to a handful of enthusiasts. The first plants were received in Paris in January 1848. They were distributed by the Minister of Agriculture to the main horticulturists. Messrs Vilmorin and Masson tried their hand at growing it, with success that was not very reassuring for the former, but quite satisfactory for the latter. In Brussels, M. de Jonghe cultivated olluco in the same year. Open, loose, fat soil is ideal for olluco. At the beginning of May, it should be planted in rays spaced Om, 50 apart, with the plants at the same distance apart in the rays. The exposure should not be too hot; the plant does not do well in the highest summer temperatures. Remember that the climate of the region from which it comes is not excessively hot. From August to April, the nights are very cold in high Peru, tempering the heat of the day. In the central plains, where spring reigns eternally, the plant is sheltered from the cold that renders sterile the high mountains of the Nevadas, whose elevation exceeds 7,000 4 and at whose foot it is mostly cultivated. It seems to grow best there during the rainy season, when the temperature is more even. For our part, we advise all agronomists to take up the cultivation of this plant; it could one day be of great service, if it can be acclimatized in our country. CRENELLATED OXALIS. Crenellated oxalis (oxalis crenata) is a bulbous plant of the geraniaceae family; first cultivated in Germany, then in England, it moved on to Belgium and France, where it was introduced in 1829. It originates from Peru. It has been alternately promoted and abandoned, so that its value as a market garden or field crop is still at least doubtful for Belgium's climate. This plant likes sandy, substantial soil; it is propagated from its bulbs, which multiply excessively; 500 to 600 and more have been counted, produced from a single tuber planted in spring. These bulbs are yellowish and have eyes. They are planted in spring, as soon as frosts are no longer a threat, at a distance of 1.30 m in all directions and at a depth of Om.05. Some growers prefer to plant in furrows, the sides of which can be used to butter the plants at different times. Ridging begins when the stems have reached Om, 10 in height. Then they are spread out on the ground, laying them down from inside to outside, and covered, leaving only the tips sticking out. The bulbs form in September and October; they are harvested 2. 14 the size of a pigeon's egg; most are smaller, rarely larger. They are stored in sand, in the cellar, vegetable greenhouse or orangery. The plant's leaves and stems, which regrow with great activity, can be cut several times during the course of their vegetation and used as cattle feed; however, they should not be given to dairy cows: the oxalic acid they contain, either free or combined with alkalis, could reduce milk production in these animals. We also believe that not cutting the leaves and stems is better for development. As we can see, the bulbs of crenellated oxalis form a little slowly; if we succeeded in obtaining an earlier variety from seed, with larger roots, then such a plant would be of immense service to agriculture and horticulture. - This root vegetable has a taste similar to that of the potato; its particular flavour is different, but pleasant (1). Deppe's oxalis. - We won't mention Deppe's oxalis (oxalis Deppei), a bulbous plant like the previous one; it is less productive, in that its bulbs don't multiply so copiously. (1) The inhabitants of Chile and Peru refer to potatoes as papas, the oxalis we're talking about as papitas, and various tuberous plants as papaliza. Parsnips are sown from November and December through to March, in rich, well-deep soil with absolutely no recent fertilization. Germinated seeds or seedlings can withstand the coldest weather and never perish. The first sowings are therefore the most lucrative for the commercial gardener and the most enjoyable for the amateur. The seeds should be spread thickly over the bed or beds, to thin out the plants later on. Don't wait until the young parsnips can be used; thin out as soon as the plant has four or six leaves. It's quite difficult to cover seeds with a rake; some return to the surface of the soil, while others bury themselves too deeply. To obviate this inconvenience, we cover them with soil taken from the paths of the beds; we also scatter it with a spade or by hand. For thinning, plants should be spaced Om, 10 to Om, 15 apart, and hoeed and weeded in good time. Like carrots, parsnips are salubrious and easy to digest; they are widely grown in Belgium, Holland and England, but not in France, where they are only cultivated on the northern borders and in Brittany. The plant belongs to the Umbelliferae family, and appears to derive from the wild parsnip. Because of its hardiness, mentioned above, this root vegetable needs no shelter in winter. Its seeds do not keep long; after a year they no longer sprout; they are harvested like carrots. DANDELION. See Dent-de-lion. POTATOES. The cultivation of the potato as a vegetable is very important; it is thanks to it that we see the first tubers of the early varieties appearing on our markets; it is also thanks to it that the disease, which attacked late potatoes for several years, was mitigated. Only early varieties should be planted in gardens. The time of planting is not exactly specified, but you can start in February and continue until June. Potatoes grow in all types of soil, but loose, sandy, loose and healthy soil is better suited to them than strong, clayey, compact soil. The quality of the soil has such an influence on the quality of the tubers that a very good variety of potato becomes unrecognizable in damp, peaty or purely clay soil. This has led some people to think that the potato degenerates, but this is not the case: it becomes good again in suitable soils. We know that our country's best potatoes grow in the sandy soils of the Kempen. True, the yield is not as high; the tubers are not as voluminous 20 as in greasy, clayey soils, but their taste is infinitely better; they are drier, more floury; they contain, all other things being equal, more starch and are therefore more salubrious. The same result would be obtained in dry, sandy gardens: anyone with such a garden can therefore count on good quality produce. It should also be noted that, in order to obtain potatoes with a good flavor, the soil must not be recently smoked, unless it is with potting soil; it must have been fertilized before winter, and even this type of soil can be grown very well in good garden soil after another harvest, such as that of cabbages, onions, etc., for which good fertilization has been given. We repeat: if you lose a little in terms of quantity, you gain in terms of quality. We mention these facts, which are also positive, to explain the nature of this plant. We are well aware that the merchant horticulturist, who sometimes rents his land at a high price, and the agronomist farmer, need to extract the greatest amount of product from the soil, and cannot follow our advice in this respect; but people who are not in these conditions will always find it easy to comply with the precepts we have just set out, concerning the garden cultivation of this plant. The varieties we recommend for cultivation are as follows: long red or goat's horn; this was grown exclusively in the lower part of the province of Limbourg; it has declined considerably over the last few years, having either been affected by disease like its congeners, or given over to con14. sumption without any sparing even for planting. This variety deserves to be widely propagated in every respect; it is productive and excellent. Early yellow lonque or yellow goat's horn; productive, very good. This is the earliest known variety: as soon as its tubers are the size of a good oak acorn, they are already edible, which is not the case with any other variety; the tubers are long, the skin smooth and the eyes not very pronounced, which is another good quality. The asparagus potato is long and early; it has the particularity of growing part of its tubers on the surface of the soil; it necessarily requires ridging, otherwise the tubers, which are in contact with light, turn green and become pungent. It is an excellent variety. - The Circassian, early, round, flattened, very productive and mealy: it belongs to the blue potato breed; its eyes are tinted bluish purple. - The Saint-Jean de Malines, earlier than the Circassian, is an excellent variety, especially for forced cultivation. - The nine-week-old variety, early, round and blue-eyed, is productive. - The August truffle, pale red, round, a little later than the preceding varieties, is mealy and very good. -The shaw, yellow, round, earlier than the August truffle. - The early dwarf, yellow, round, very early. We also recommend the flat yellow, known as langue de bœuf, which is long, flattened, light and mealy; it is widely grown around Liège, Tongres and Maestricht. It has a sub-variety of the same shape and characteristics, only pink in color. - Finally, the vitelotte de Paris is a very good variety. These are not the only early potato varieties grown in various parts of the country. In any case, we advise the horticulturist to limit his choice to three or four good varieties; a greater number leads to confusion, without any advantage. The same number is sufficient for the farmer. But what should never be lost sight of is the need to continue sowing the seeds of good varieties, to improve them still further. In these laudable trials, we must not neglect to grow young potatoes in sandy soil, in order to have definite data on their value or non-value. For we must not forget that this solana is a plant of the high mountains of South America; therefore, although this plant does not refuse to grow in our fields or valleys, it is no less true that it prefers a soil that more or less resembles its native soil, i.e., a soft, sandy, light, substantial and healthy soil. In gardens, plants are usually planted with a spade or hoe, in deeply loosened soil, loosened by ploughing and amended with fresh manure ploughed in immediately before or during planting. The spacing to be given to them varies slightly according to the varieties with stronger or weaker and higher stems: the smallest are given Om, 30 in the rows and 0m, 45 in the rows between them; the largest, from Om, 45 in all directions to Om, 50 and Om, 60. In our Flanders region, in the provinces of Antwerp and Brabant, we commonly plant at lesser distances than the one we have just indicated. It's a very bad routine and a very bad economy. If it's true that a plant can be too far away, it can also be too close: both extremes should be avoided. The Malinese method. - There's a highly recommended method for growing potatoes: it consists in planting the tubers with their sprouts. But this excellent practice requires special precautions. First of all, the shoots must be medium-sized or have Om,04 to Om,07; too long and planting is difficult; etiolated, they rot in part and the potatoes come out irregularly, which would hinder the much-needed work of hoeing and ridging. Here's how we've practised it ourselves, with the greatest success: at the beginning of February, in a frost-free spot, we spread a layer of oat bales or old tan bales, to the thickness of Om,04 or Om,08. On this layer we place the tubers close together, top up. (We call the top the part where the eyes that will form the stems or shoots are joined together.) They project their roots into these bales of oats or tannin, and, when they are removed for planting, carry away between their fibers what served as a layer, so that the roots are preserved intact and the plants continue their vegetation very-actively; we know that the jets form at the same time as the roots. We need hardly remind you that these potatoes must be handled with care before and during planting; they must be gently removed one by one from their roots and placed in baskets. By following this procedure, you can bring forward by at least a fortnight, and that's a long time, all the vegetative phases of the same variety of potato, planted at the same time, in the same soil, but which has not been treated according to this method. The Berlin method differs from the Malines method in that Berlin market gardeners plant shoots without tubers. As for winter cultivation, which consists of burying the tubers more or less deeply and protecting them against frost with layers of litter, we are not strong supporters. While there have been some somewhat satisfactory successes in England, we don't think we have much to commend about the trials tried in Belgium. The greatest difficulty lies in the fact that the potato doesn't germinate until spring, so it has to be forced to do so before its natural season, and this is how it's done. Instead of bringing the tubers in, they are left to green up and dry for a few weeks in the sun in the field, then placed in the attic. At the end of October, they're planted on a south-facing hillside, and soon start to grow: then, during the winter, they're covered with cloches on which litter or leaves are placed, depending on frost. In January or February, the plants can produce quite beautiful tubers. For planting, large or medium-sized tubers are best, and should be preferred to small ones, peels and chopped roots. Everyone will have noticed that large tubers produce large stems; well, it's these large stems that in turn produce the largest tubers. We cover them with Om,08 to Om, 10 of soil, and, for early plantings in February, with Om, 15. As soon as the first leaves appear, we give a first crimping, and, when the stems are Om, 15 to Om, 20 high, we hoe them a first time; a few days later, a second time. Weed and hoe again. The potato soil must be loosened and stirred up; this is one of the principles on which the cultivation of this plant is based. Potatoes are stored in cellars. Tubers of early varieties are of little use in winter; they are only kept for planting purposes: late varieties are much preferable for winter consumption. In spring, as soon as you notice that the sprouts are developing, pull them out. This operation should be repeated every fifteen or twenty days. When frosts are no longer to be feared, they are best stored in an attic or other dry place. DETAILS AND DISTINCTIVE CHARACTERISTICS The potato (solanum tuberosum, Linn.) belongs to the solanaceae family. The plant is too widely known for us to give any description. We have already mentioned that it originates from South America. It was introduced into Belgium in 1588. Charles de l'Escluse, a Belgian botanist, was the first person in our country to describe and spread it. From Belgium it passed to England, but in those days it traveled more as an ornamental plant than as an edible one. It took a long time to make this precious plant popular. It was only at the beginning of the 17th century that it began to be cultivated more widely, in Germany, France and Belgium. Today, we see potato cultivation occupying a very large proportion of our country's arable land. Radishes, of which we now have a large number of varieties, are sown from February to July. Properly cultivated, they can be eaten in twenty-five days. The first seedlings are sown in the south, under cover. Cover them during the cold nights of February and March with straw mats or other covers. They need rich soil, covered with Om, 05 to Om, 06 of compost. The well-trodden and loosened soil is gently harrowed with a rake. The seed is only lightly covered, and the soil is compacted with the back of the spade. Radishes are usually grown among lettuces. The main varieties are: round pink, early; white, early; salmon, violet, small gray, black, yellow, summer gray, peppery, firm and full-fleshed; China pink or winter, cylindroid or conical, peppery and tender. On top of these good qualities, it has the merit of being autumnal: sown in September, it is ready for harvest in October or November; sown in October or November and kept in a greenhouse, it continues to grow and can be served in winter. We owe its introduction to a French missionary, Abbé Voisin, to whom we are also indebted for another excellent radish, the Chinese violet, which only grows well in autumn. Manure and watering must be spared if you want radishes that grow quickly and are therefore tender. Summer seedlings should be planted out of the sun for three-quarters of the day, so that they are exposed to the sun's rays until nine or ten o'clock in the morning. Exposed to heat all day long, they become hard, split and are no longer edible. The cultivated radish (raphanus sativus, Linn.) is an annual plant in the cruciferous family. It originated in China and was imported to Europe in the late Middle Ages. Radishes are shaped like little round turnips. RAVE. These radishes differ from those described above only in the shape of the root. It has the same shades of color, white, pink, gray, etc., only longer. This radish is less esteemed than the small radish or the one with small rounded roots. CULTIVATED HORSERADISH. Horseradish differs from radish in that it is never sown before June; earlier sowing risks it going to seed, in which case its root is of no value. Horseradish prefers clay rather than sandy soil, so if the soil is light, the plant should be trampled or firmed before sowing. Horseradish is rarely planted in specific beds; it is usually sown in paths between beds of onions, carrots, etc., and at the edges of flowerbeds. Horseradish roots are larger than radish roots, firmer in consistency, always black or gray on the outside, and shaped like round or elongated turnips. Horseradish keeps well in sand and under cover 23 from frost, all winter long. According to botanists, it is simply a variety of the small radish, and is therefore called raphanus sativus by Linnaeus. But, for the gardener and as a vegetable plant, it differs in many respects, as we have just seen, from WILD RAIFORT. This plant should not be confused with the one above. It is perennial, whereas cultivated horseradish is annual. Wild horseradish, also a member of the cruciferous family, belongs to a completely different genus: it's Linnaeus' cochlearia armoracia. Its real French name is cranson. It is also known by the following trivial names: cranson rustique, cran de Bretagne, meeredik, mérédic, capuchin mustard, German mustard, English cram. The plant thrives in damp places and on the banks of streams. Its radical leaves are very large, straight, petiolate, oval-oblong; the flowers are small, white; the stems are 1.00 m high. The plant's roots, which are yellow on the outside and white on the inside, are large and long. They are grated, and vinegar and salt are added to season meats and stimulate the appetite. This root is not unhealthy; it is an exciter and antiscorbutic. This plant is rarely found in the wild in Belgium, and all too rarely in gardens. However, it's easy to give it a little corner where nothing else will grow: the plant is content with this and will live for half a century without the slightest care. When you want to use it up, detach one or more roots, re2 18 close the soil, and the plant continues to vegetate as before. RAIPONCE. Rapunzel (campanula rapunculus, Linn.), of the campanulaceae family, biennial and indigenous plant. Found in meadows, hedgerows and woodland edges. It is used as a vegetable for its soft, sweet roots, which are rabe-shaped and the size of a finger peel. It is used in salads: the roots are cut into pieces and mixed with other salads, such as lamb's lettuce. It is grown in the garden, where the root becomes larger and more delicate, to provide a winter or spring salad. Riponce is sown in July; sown earlier, it will sometimes set seed in autumn, and will always perish afterwards. The seeds of this campanella are very fine; they should not be covered with soil at all. Just give them a moistening to attach them to the soil after sowing. The roots and small emerging leaves are used mainly in spring. SALSIFY AND SCORZONERA. These two plants require absolutely the same cultivation. The best soil for them is open, slightly damp, loose and, above all, deeply tilled and smoked the previous year. You can hardly expect to get a good yield from these root vegetables in strong, compact, clayey soil, unless you amend it with a lot of manure and loosen it by repeated ploughing. The taproots, unable to go far enough into the soil, seek other directions, becoming forked and misshapen. Sow salsify and scorzonera seeds from mid-March to September, in rows spaced 0.15 m apart. If it is dry, germination should be stimulated by evening and morning watering. You need to sow thickly; a quarter or a fifth of the seed is almost always sterile; then, the birds are very greedy, and even if it is well covered, they still destroy it when it has already sprouted. This is because the cotyledons or seminal leaves remain enclosed in the episperm (seed coat) for some time. To prevent this, black woollen or linen threads should be crossed over the boards in different directions. Experience shows that birds are more afraid of the black than the white color of this scarecrow. The seeds of these two plants are very difficult to cover, so it's best here, as we've advised elsewhere, to cover them with soil taken from the paths of the boards, and to spread this soil over the seeds, dispersing it evenly with a spade or by hand, until no more seeds are visible. Once in vegetation, salsify and scorzonera require no more care than a few weedings and hoeings during the summer. Salsify, also known as sersify, is harvested in the first winter after sowing. The roots are white, longer than those of scorsonera; the flowers are a beautiful violet; the leaves, narrower, smoother and tender, are used as a salad throughout the summer. This is Linnaeus' tragopogon porrifolium. It grows spontaneously in the southern provinces of France. The root of this plant is very dirty, as is that of scorsonera. The latter is black, with yellow flowers and downy, broader leaves. It is native to Spain and southern France. It is Linnaeus' scorsonera hispanica. Its roots can be harvested in the first or second year; to harvest in the first year, sow in March; if left to grow until the second winter, it can be sown from March to August. Its seed is only good for one year; it must be harvested every morning as soon as the dew has disappeared; it falls daily. Salsify and scorzonera do not freeze; they can be left in the ground uncovered, with the precaution only of removing part of them before heavy frosts, for winter consumption. Roots are fully developed by the second year. Plants go to seed in the first and second years of vegetation; the stems are cut off, which, instead of hindering growth, gives the roots more volume. SCOLYMA. Spanish bark beetle thrives in deep, cool soil, such as that recommended for salsify and scorzonera. It is sown in May and June, in rows or broadcast; sown earlier, it sets seed and its root is no longer edible. When the young plant has four leaves, it should be thinned out and spaced about 0*, 20 apart in all directions. Plants should not be allowed to grow to full size; as soon as the root has the volume of a scorsonera, it should be given up for consumption; as it is still young, it is tender. The plant needs to be covered in winter. The scolymus root must be stripped of its woody center; the part surrounding this tough pivot is the only edible part; it shares the taste of scorsonera without surpassing it; we therefore doubt that the plant will ever be very successful in Belgium. The scolymus (scolymus hispanicus, Linn.) inhabits southern France and Spain, and is a member of the Compositae family. It has a thistle-like habit, with very prickly leaves and yellow flowers. It is also known as cardouille, yellow thorn or cardoussés. SOUCHET. A perennial plant whose habit resembles that of grasses. Souchet, also known as ground almond, edible souchet, cyperus esculentus, Linn. of the Cyperaceae family, grows spontaneously in damp meadows in several provinces of France. In the market garden, it is cultivated for the use of its floury, tender tubers, which are found at the ends of its root composed of fine fibers. These tubers are about the size of a hazelnut and are eaten cooked or roasted. In early April, they are planted to a depth of one inch, in pockets of 4 or 5 tubers, at a distance of 0.40 m. During the summer, the plant requires only weeding, hoeing and watering. Tubers are 15. removed in October and stored in sand to protect them from frost. They are very pleasant to the taste. The Spaniards and Italians express the juice and, with the addition of water and sugar, make a very pleasant kind of orgeat. TARNOTES. Native to Belgium and France, this perennial plant has long been known: our ancestors called it aerdnooten, and the names marcusson, anette, marron de terre, souris à queue, gland de terre are all synonyms; it is the tuberous chaste, Lathyrus tuberosus de Linn. of the legume family. It grows on weak, angular stems, Om,3 or Om,4 high; its pink flowers are borne five or six together on long axillary peduncles. The tarnote belongs among the edible plants as a tuber; in fact, its long, blackish-grey roots, white on the inside, attached to deep, creeping nets, and not unlike those of some of our peonies, can provide an undoubtedly pleasant dish; they have a mild flavour, very similar to that of our chestnuts. But let us say in passing, so as not to mislead, that while we recommend introducing a few plants of this species into the garden, we are far from recommending it to any great extent. Note that if de l'Escluse says that chamabalanos (tarnotes) were once eaten like turnips and parsnips, then we were not yet in possession of our excellent and productive potatoes, 18 As for cultivation, the plant requires no special care. When the stalks begin to grow, they are reamed like peas; to harvest tubers, the soil is dug up around the plant, without removing it. TOPINAMBOUR. The plant requires neither special cultivation nor meticulous care. It is for this very reason that this root vegetable should attract the grower's full attention, mainly from an agricultural point of view. So far, the Jerusalem artichoke has not been very successful in the vegetable garden, for two reasons: firstly, it is very difficult to get rid of once the plant has taken root in the garden. The smallest tubers are enough to keep the plant multiplying, and all the more so as they can withstand the most rigorous cold; the second reason is that, in good soil, you can grow a more valuable plant, such as the potato. As a result, we are not very inclined to recommend this plant for small-scale market gardening. However, we would like to express our opinion on the cultivation of Jerusalem artichokes to make use of lost or uncultivated land, such as we see a lot of in the Campine: we recommend trying it out in sandy soils that are currently uncultivated or almost sterile. There, even if the plant yields only half a crop, it will still be very profitable for the grower. The tubers, stems and leaves are eaten avidly by livestock. The broad leaves and 3 stems, which reach up to 2*,00 in height, provide copious fodder, which is precisely what is lacking in the Kempen and so powerfully counteracts land clearance. Jerusalem artichoke (helianthus tuberosus, Linn.), also known as Canada artichoke, Jerusalem artichoke, earth pear, is a member of the Compositae family, originally from Brazil. Its roots are planted and used like potatoes; they are starchy, sweet and come in a wide variety of shapes. They contribute to the artichoke's taste. Digized "( NATURAL CROPS. VEGETABLE PLANTS WITH EDIBLE FRUIT. PUMPKIN. Pumpkins and all cucurbits, or plants of the same family, are native to warm countries; all are fast-growing and beautiful, but very sensitive to cold. They like warmth, humidity and the most earthy soil possible. These plants, by virtue of a property inherent in their constitution, are not afraid of fermenting manure; on the contrary, they grow and develop there with luxuriant strength, an indication of their well-being and the abundant nourishment they find there. Some horticulturists, taking advantage of this circumstance, grow pumpkins on a pile of manure that must not be used during the year or while the pumpkins are growing; they become monstrous there. In May, pits 1m,00 wide and 0m,50 deep are made in the ground, filled with tightly packed manure and covered with Om, 08 to Om, 10 of potting soil; then three pumpkin seeds are placed in them, covered with Om, 02 of this potting soil, and only the strongest stalk is left. The pumpkin is not pruned, but the superfluous lateral shoots on the main stem are removed. As soon as this stem has reached a length of 2m,00 to 3m,00, a dimple 0m,08 or Om, 09 deep is dug; the stem is attached by means of a hook to a joint or knot which is covered with compost. Layering should be repeated in the same way, three times, 1m,00 or 2m,00 apart: the plant takes root at the joints and draws a stronger dose of nourishing juices from the soil. As soon as a fruit is knotted, the upper part of each stem is removed at Om, 40 or Om, 50 above each fruit, leaving at least two leaves. When you want to produce pumpkins of immense size, sometimes weighing 100 kilograms, you leave only one stem and one fruit; you remove everything else, except the leaves. In ordinary cultivation, each plant bears two stems and two fruits. If you have tarpaulins or greenhouses, it's best to first force the young pumpkin plant onto a warm bed. To do this, sow the seeds as early as March in small pots filled with potting soil; bury the pots right up to the edges. Air is added whenever the temperature permits, to get the plants used to it. By treating them in this way, you gain a lot in terms of vegetation. Plant them as described above, leaving the entire root ball. In the early days of planting, they are protected from strong sunlight; towards evening, they are uncovered, unless a cold night or strong wind can be foreseen: in this case, the plants are kept in their shelters. Similarly, when they are young, they should not be left covered if the weather is mild and rainy. Pumpkins require frequent and copious watering, which is partly responsible for their vigorous growth and the size of their fruit, which ripen in September. They are not cut when perfectly ripe, but a little earlier; if this precaution is taken, they keep better in winter. Their seeds retain their productive capacity for five or six years. These plants and a few species of this type are not sufficiently cultivated in our country; their usefulness in the domestic economy is not well known. In France, they are frequently used in soups and for frying. If they were not used as human food, they should at least be cultivated for livestock. The pig breed is not only very avid, but also feeds very well on them. The pumpkin, more properly known as squash (cucurbita pepo, Linn.), is the type of the Cucurbitaceae family. This plant and many other species of this genus are found in the East Indies and seem to have come to us from there. The following are also cultivated as food plants: Siam ball gourd; flattened fruit, less voluminous than the previous species; firmer flesh, longer shelf life. Messinèze squash, with plain whitish skin and red flesh. Nutmeg squash, pear-shaped, reddish skin with blood-colored pulp. Brazilian sugar squash, sweet, juicy flesh. These squashes still have numerous sub-varieties, many of which are grown as ornamental plants or as curiosities. Giraumont. - This breed is distinguished by the oblong shape of its fruit. It has a large number of sub-varieties in terms of green, yellow or white color, and fruit size. The largest, with the smoothest skin, are the best. Their fine, delicate flesh, less watery than that of cucumbers, is suitable for the same uses; it does not have the strong and sometimes unpleasant taste. They keep well into winter. Pastisson, commonly known as bonnet d'électeur, bonnet de prêtre, etc., offers great diversity in shape, size and fruit color, which varies from pale to dark yellow, often mottled or striped with green. The stalks, which hang from stakes, are 1.00 to 1.50 m long. The flesh is firm and brittle; sliced and fried, it imitates the taste of artichokes. Watermelon (cucurbita anguria, Duch.). This species, also known as laciniated squash, is distinguished from the others by its deeply cut leaves, its smooth, orbicular fruit speckled with star-shaped spots, its often reddish flesh, and its black or red, not whitish, seeds. There are several varieties. The name watermelon is reserved for those whose firm fruit is only eaten candied or fried. The name watermelon is given more particularly to varieties with melting, watery flesh. In common usage, the name pumpkin is not given to this species. They have trailing stems like those of pumpkins, and are grown in the same way as pumpkins. Marrow or vegetable marrow. - We're inclined to call this cucurbit squash cauliflower, because the fruit, while green, imitates the taste of cauliflower to a fault. In 1849, we cultivated the vegetable marrow, and we tet hace - V we are assured of the fact that we are making progress. It can be grown like pumpkins. We give it a warm southern exposure on a bed, close to a wall or hedge. Do not entrust seeds or young plants to the open ground before May 15, unless they are sheltered from cold nights in the garden. 2. 16 200gl0 cloches. In this case, they can be planted as early as mid-April, which is preferable; even better is to advance the seedlings on a warm bed and under a frame; they can then be placed on potting soil, as described for pumpkins, and covered with cloches during cold nights. They can be harvested for most of the summer; six to twelve plants are more than enough for a household. The squash is not pruned, but left to grow freely. The fruit is used before it turns yellow. We would like to draw the grower's attention to the cultivation of marrow squash; it can be seasoned in a variety of ways and makes an excellent dish. Treated in large-scale cultivation, marrow squash is a considerable source of high-quality livestock feed. Its fruit can be kept until February, and even longer. Simply store them in a dry, frost-free place, like pumpkins. CUCUMBERS AND GHERKINS. Cucumbers should be sown from May 15 onwards; sowing earlier risks losing them: the slightest white frost will destroy them. If the land to be planted is not very rich, pits of Om, 25 cubes are made, 0.60 m apart. These are filled with manure or compost, and three seeds are planted in each; when the plant is secure, only one plant is left in each pit. The rest of the cultivation consists of weeding, and removing a few branches that intertwine and cause confusion. In September, we start to cut the small fruits, called gherkins, which are preserved in vinegar for seasoning. Several varieties are known: the snake cucumber (cucumis flexuosus), which is grown for the uniqueness of its long, flexuous fruit. Only a few centimetres long, it is also candied in vinegar. - The hátif white cucumber, elongated and round at both ends. - Bonneuil white, larger than the previous one. - Black, with brown rind and yellow stripes. - Bouquet or mignon de Russic, almost round, very hasty. - Hâtif de Hollande, turning yellow as it ripens. - The green gherkin; this is the most important because of the benefits it provides, although the small, green fruit of all varieties can also be candied. The following varieties are new; seeds are available from leading growers: Conqueror; - Walken's Long; - Manchester Prize; - Hero of Surrey; - Victory of Bath; - Man of Kent. The cucumber (cucumis sativus, Linn.) originates from the Orient. STRAWBERRY. This excellent fruit, the improvement of which has made immense progress in recent years, has not yet said its last word. The ease with which new varieties can be obtained from seed should encourage the horticulturist to constantly sow the best known fruits, and thus tend to produce better and better. The strawberry plant thrives in good, loose, earthy soil, sandy rather than clayey, and not in the shade, although the type, or primary species, is native to the woods. It needs to be ploughed, tilled and hoeed, and watered if it is to thrive. And, singularly, not only does it tolerate being watered in bright sunshine, but it must even be watered during the hottest periods, when the sun is shining on the plants. Observation and experience have shown that it prefers watering to rain, so careful growers always give it a generous sprinkling before thunderstorms; only then, when the plant has received a good soaking from the watering can, is rain very beneficial. The soil should be prepared by ploughing to a depth of at least Om 40. It is fertilized with half-consumed cow manure, or compost made from liquid manure, lime and consumed grass. This compost should have been in a heap for at least a year, and stirred from time to time. Strawberry plants are planted in beds, beds or borders in September, March or April. Use runners, rooted cuttings or seedlings. For Belgium's climate, it's best to plant from

September 1st to 15th. Although this fortnightly interval is not essential, we recommend it because, planted earlier, strawberry plants sometimes suffer from the heat, and, planted later, they root only imperfectly; as a result, they are lifted in winter by frost, so that their roots are out of the ground, and the plants freeze. The most suitable distance between plants is Om,40 to Om,45 for varieties with small leaves, and 0m,50 to 0m,60 in all directions for those with robust leaves and fruit. The space left between strawberry plants is not a loss of land; on the contrary, it's a gain; the fruit yield will be greater; harvesting, hoeing and maintenance work will be easier and more convenient. Strawberries do not require this distance when planted around the edges of squares; a space of Om.30 to Om.40 is sufficient. It is entirely optional to give the beds a width according to taste or desire; however, observe that only three rows per bed, or four at most, should be planted, otherwise care and harvesting will become difficult. In August, young plants that have taken root and are produced from nets or runners are placed in the nursery; this prepares them for better root formation and fortification. In the first fortnight of September, we put them in place, as we said above, taking care to cut off the root tips and leaving them only Om 08 to 0m, 09 long. Soon after this pruning, new and multiplied roots will form; withered or yellowed leaves and superfluous ones will also be cut off, leaving only a few young leaves. After planting, water immediately if the weather is dry. Then we mulch: this involves spreading a light layer of fresh stable manure or litter between the rows of strawberry plants. Some gardeners mulch before planting, which is more convenient. In the following spring, this fertilizer will be sufficiently consumed to be ploughed in when the first hoeing is done; it should then be mulched again. Every year around this time, 16. between the rows, gutters are made and a good liquid fertilizer, such as slurry, is poured in. Two or three days later, these trenches are closed. Mulch should be left on the beds throughout the summer; it maintains a gentle humidity, provides food for the plants through its gradual putrefaction, and keeps the fruit clean, as otherwise it is constantly laden with sand or earth, which diminishes its beauty and good quality. Runners should be cut off, not pulled out, as some people do, as they form on the mother plants, exhausting them and reducing the yield. Cutting begins when the strawberry plants begin to flower, and continues for as long as the runners reproduce; however, some should be kept if new plantings are to be made. Strawberry beds should be renewed after three years. Every year, the strawberry plants should be replanted with a sufficient quantity of potting soil; without this precaution, the plantations will have to be renewed at the end of the second year. As you know, strawberry plants absorb all the nutritive juices they can get their hands on, and as soon as they run out of them, they languish, producing insignificant yields. As a result, they heal, their roots bare, and, by the admirable organization that the Creator has given to living beings, the plants that are born with stolons or runners go further, away from their mother, and seek their nourishment in a new soil, as it were. So, we repeat, this plant needs to be fertilized at least every year, and after the third year, a new plot of land should be designated for its cultivation. It will only return to the land it has occupied after five to eight years, once it has been given other crops. Some people cut the plants at the end of the summer and say they like it; others condemn the practice. For our part, we've never tried it, and are suspending our judgment in this regard. Strawberries are sown in June, immediately after the fruit has ripened, from which the most beautiful and the best varieties should be chosen. In the past, strawberry plants were sown on beds in the ground. We recommend sowing in terrines or small wooden crates, 10 to 12 mm deep, 50 to 0.60 mm long and 25 to 30 mm wide. These crates are filled with light, earthy soil, with one-sixth sand mixed in. Sow the seeds in them, covering them very lightly, by 2 to 3 millimeters only. The seeds are then lightly moistened, and repeated carefully so as not to dry out the surface of the soil. The terrines or crates should be placed in the shade, so that they only receive the first rays of the rising sun. It would be very wise to keep seeds sown under a frame; heavy rain can cause seeds and labor to be lost forever in a matter of moments. Treated in this way, the seeds germinate in a fortnight, and the young plants can still be transplanted into nurseries in August or September. The following varieties are well worth cultivating, and will soon make outdated species and varieties of lesser value disappear from our gardens: Deptford pine, very large fruit, fine, vinous flavor, excellent;-Black Prince, early; - Royal-pine, dark red fruit with excellent flavor; - Hooper's seedling, very large fruit, veryabundant; - la Liégeoise (Haquin), very-early, calabash-shaped fruit, excellent, vinous flavor; - British Queen, obtuse, scarlet-red fruit; excellent flavor; good yield; - Imperial (Bath), excellent, large fruit; - Bicton white, rounded white fruit, the size of a pigeon's egg; strong flavor; - Keen's seedling, early; - Mammouth, very large fruit. We would also like to point out the following varieties, which can be chosen by both the amateur and the commercial gardener: Comte de Paris; - Forest; - Myatt's fertilized Hautbois; - Myatt's carly prolific; - Princesse Royale (Pelvelain); - Pineapple of Deptford; - Prince Albert; - Queen of the British Isles; - Princess Alice Maud; - Patrick seedling; - Elton pine. The name remontant is given to strawberry plants which, after a first harvest, form new stems and flowers and continue to bear fruit until autumn. This is a valuable quality in strawberries: unfortunately, it is only found in the smallest number of varieties, notably in the Alpine strawberry, known as the four-season strawberry, and in a few of its very limited varieties. Good things are said of a new remontant strawberry, named perpetuelle de Saint-Gilles by M. de Jonghe of Brussels. Non-remontant strawberry plants have only one season to flower and bear fruit. So anyone who doesn't have a remontant or perpetual variety in his collection can only expect to pick strawberries for five or six weeks, whereas remontant varieties provide a continuation of fruit for four or five months. The tomato or love apple (solanum lycopersicon, Linn.), an annuclle plant of the solanaceae family, is native to Mexico. It is very easy to grow: simply sow it at the beginning of May in good, loose, oily soil, in a warm spot, at the foot of a wall; in this case, its fruit ripens in September. If you want them in August, sow them in a bed in February, and put the young plants with rootballs in the ground around May 15th. The plant, which comes from a warm region, is very sensitive to cold; a cool night, without the thermometer even going down to 0°, will kill it. Tomatoes are planted Om, 40 apart. To speed up fruit ripening, when they start to turn red, pinch the ends of the branches and remove a few leaves. If the tomatoes are surprised by the first cold spells of autumn, they should be stored in an orangery or in a dry place exposed to the sun. There, the fruit, which is more or less formed but not yet colored, will finish ripening. We grow two types of tomato: the red and the large-fruited yellow. The latter, being hardier, is preferred for our country's climate. In the south of France and in Italy, love apples are grown in open fields; fried in oil with onions, they are a dish that is part of the daily diet of the people. In France, the fruit is used to make a much-appreciated sweet and sour sauce. It is used to season meats and soups. The fruit can be stored well into winter, on boards or dressers, in a dry place away from frost. FORCED CULTIVATION. GENERAL CONCEPTS. The purpose of forced cultivation is to grow and ripen plants or fruit using shelters, greenhouses, tarpaulins, layers, etc., either before or after the time set by nature. This is how we pick the most delicious fruits in warm countries in the middle of winter, and how the industrial gardener procures pineapples, strawberries, peas, etc. in the middle of the harsh season. The most lucrative and important branch of horticulture is forced cultivation. Its extension leaves much to be desired in our country; however, its future looks brighter here than with our French neighbors: there, it is severely hampered by easy communication with the south of France, either by steamboat or by rail, which brings back in a few hours melons, early peas and other fruits, grown in the open ground, without layers, without frames, without artificial fire, and consequently without cost. Horticulturalists in the north of France are therefore unable to fight off this fatal competition. We don't think the same thing is to be feared for Belgium: the distance to be covered and the transport costs will save our gardeners from this inconvenience. This branch of cultivation therefore deserves the care and attention of our intelligent gardeners. Before going into details concerning the cultivation of the various vegetables and edible plants that we are accustomed to forcing, we must necessarily preface this with a brief explanation of the means we employ to help nature in its productions; these means are: accots, rechauds, côtières, ados, cloches, layers, chassis, tarpaulins and greenhouses. PHYSICAL CHANGES IN THE SOIL. Soil color has a significant influence on the physical properties of the soil. Black soils absorb caloric energy, while yellow or whitish clays reflect it. As a result, the soil can be made to absorb a greater dose of caloric energy by changing its color. If you spread black loam, soot or burnt tan on the soil, you increase the heat of the earth, in that the caloric penetrates it more easily. The same caloric that escapes from the earth during the night, because all bodies naturally tend to come into equilibrium, places plants in a warm ambient atmosphere, and, as we can see, acts favorably on their growth. Hard, white soil, on the other hand, repels heat during the day and is cold at night. To obtain inexpensive black soil that achieves the above-mentioned aim, we recommend watering a heap of tannin with a solution of iron sulfate two or three times a year. This mixture will then take on a pronounced black hue. Oak bark is known to contain high levels of gallic acid. This acid, when combined with iron oxide, forms iron gallate, a salt that strongly colors black. Here's how it's done: on ten carts of tanned or oak bark from the tanners' vats, ten kilograms of iron sulfate dissolved in enough water to wet the whole mass is poured, stirred with forks and then, six months later and as the bark decomposes, subjected to the same operation. After eighteen months to two years, you can use it to your advantage. (Iron sulfate, couperose or green vitriol, is a cheap salt and can be found at all color merchants). SHELTERS. Walls. - Facing east to west, walls provide excellent shelter for spring vegetables, protecting them from the north winds; they hasten the development of vegetables and fruit; at the same time they offer the most favorable exposure for vines, peach trees and other fruit trees, and on the north side shelter for vegetables too delicate to withstand the sun's scorching rays in midsummer. It's against these walls that the coastal plantations so favorable to early crops are established. Hedges. - Hedges from east to west also provide shelter for forcing vegetables. Forming narrow four0 rees of branching vegetation that break the cold winds, they should be composed of trees or shrubs with taproot or little tracery that have the property of growing in tight, rigid lines, of being susceptible to mowing, of retaining all or part of their leaves in winter; of keeping themselves bushy from the root collar to the end of the intertwining twigs. Beech, which retains its dry leaves for a long time, Western red cedar, which can withstand shearing very well, and yew, which is a little slow-growing, all lend themselves well to hedge formation. The same is true of many other plants, such as dogwood, privet, various thorns (cratœgus and mespilus), and even plum, apple and other fruit trees and shrubs. Windbreaks. - Windbreaks are used to protect plants grown on teas. By means of these shelters, plants that would not have been able to withstand being in the ground are placed in a different position and, so to speak, in a different climate. Windbreaks are very useful for many delicate plants; they can be used to form ados and counter-ados in flat terrain. These are plantations of closely-spaced trees, which are given a height according to the plants they are intended to grow. Cedars, cypresses, poplars and robinias can all be used. Dead hedges are also used as windbreaks. They consist of a close alignment of fir or other wood poles, the ends of which are charred to make them last longer. Doormats. - If you don't have any hedges or walls 2. 17 to place in a suitable direction, you can make up for this by using doormats held upright by stakes to which they are attached vertically. Some plants need to be sheltered not only from gales, hail or rain, but also from the sun's fierce rays. These shelters, which can easily be given a height for cultivation, are placed for early plants from east to west, so that not a single ray of sunlight is lost. In this way, the plants are forced to produce several days before those grown in open fields, whether the land is ploughed flat or sloping to the south. The market gardeners of Paris have a large number of these straw mats in their vegetable gardens; they are made of dry reeds or rye straw; their height varies from one to two meters. On the north-facing side, delicate plants are protected from the heat; lettuces, purslane, claytonia, spinach, chervil and parsley are grown here; cruciferous plants such as cauliflower and Savoy cabbage are sown here; flea beetles are less likely to attack these plants in the shade. - These shelters simply consist of a thin layer of straw held between two wooden rods which are attached to stakes placed at intervals. Doormats are also essential for covering greenhouses, tarpaulins, layers and bells during cold winter nights and days, and even hot summer days. TEENS. Ados, which are found in some growers' gardens, should be established in every vegetable garden without exception; they cost only a little trouble, which the gardener is wrong to be stingy about. Ados are formed in the most sheltered parts of the garden, and best in south-east-facing locations. They are trained as follows: By giving the soil a deep drying, soil is removed from the front and carried to the back, so as to form an inclined plane, the elevation of which exceeds by Om 20 to Om, 30 the most sloping or front part. Early crops such as radishes, lettuces, carrots and cauliflower thrive best here. If you fill the 0.10 to 0.15 m ados with good potting soil, vegetation is accelerated, especially if it's black potting soil, which absorbs the sun's rays and increases heat considerably. Even better results are obtained when plants are covered with cloches or frames. COTIERS. The only difference between cotiere plants and ados is that they can be set up in the middle of the garden, forming slopes inclined to the south; they are still called borders. These various methods considerably advance vegetation. CLOCHES. Cloches are glass vases used temporarily to shelter certain delicate plants in their youth, which have difficulty withstanding 8 the temperature variations of our climate, and especially white frosts. They vary in size according to the size of the plants and the purpose for which they are to be used; most often they are in one piece, with a diameter of Om,40 to Om,45 at the base and Om,20 to Om,25 at the top; the height is equal to the diameter of the base. White glass is generally preferred. Their price varies from 70 c. to 1 fr. They are available from the main glassworks in Belgium, and can be ordered according to shape and size. Bells are also built with fir, oak or other types of wood. The five spokes are fitted at the top to a kind of wooden pentagon which crowns them, leaving an opening so that air can be blown in at will. These bells range from half a meter to a meter in diameter. Lead bells are also oval and vary in size. Each layer consists of two distinct parts: the manure bed and the soil bed. The manure bed, regularly arranged and compacted, consists of animal or vegetable substances likely to enter into fermentation and thereby give off gentle heat, at the same time as exhaling beneficial moisture. These two qualities - warmth and humidity - are the prerequisites for producing beautiful, long-lasting vegetation in the happiest climates. The more or less thick, more or less substantial bed of earth with which the manure is covered is intended to support and nourish the plants. The thickness of this bed, whose soil must always be loose and of good quality, varies from Om.16 to Om.30. The thickness of the manure bed also varies according to the amount of heat required. Depending on the thickness and quality of the manure bed, the layers can be distinguished as warm, tepid or dull. Warm layer. - The warm layer is made up of horse manure recently removed from the stable. This manure has the added advantage of being usable at all times, provided it is kept dry and in the form of a millstone: to use it, it must be sufficiently moistened; the manure soon begins to ferment and produce heat. The layers are built up by laying the manure in successive, even beds. The manure should be firmed up and trodden on, at the same time as any pits or unevennesses are filled in, and watered with a watering can if it is not damp enough on its own. The bed should be of equal thickness everywhere; this is what determines 17. the uniformity of heat in the soil. The thickness of warm layers varies from Om, 60 to 1m, 00 and beyond; the width also varies: it can be from Om, 80 to 1m,32; the length is indeterminate, but rarely is it less than. 2*,60. The narrowest layers, or those with a width of Om.80, are used for the earliest forced cultivation, because they are easier to keep warm with stoves. The name "stoves" is given to the manure that surrounds the layer when its heat begins to drop. This manure must be trodden down like the manure in the bed itself, as we have said. Accot. - Manure, leaves or tanning cloth are raised around the layers to keep out the cold. Accot is given a thickness of Om, 40 to Om, 60, depending on the material used and the intensity of the cold. Their height should reach the full height of the layer. Stoves. - From November to April, you need to keep the layers warm, without having to repeat them. To this end, new manure is compacted in the surrounding paths; every two weeks, this manure is stirred and compacted again, adding new manure if necessary. For stoves, dry manure is used if the weather is rainy, and wet manure if it's dry. In the harsher season, the beds and stoves are covered at the same time. On top of the layer, a casing called a trunk is placed.... A. This box is inclined to the south and higher at the back than at the front, so that water doesn't drip into the interior and the frame receives the sun's rays better. An ordinary box is from Om,15 to Om,28 high at the front and from Om,28 to 0m,32 at the back. It is also optional to give the trunks a greater or lesser inclination, depending on the size of E A and the nature of the plants to be grown. The box is designed to support the frame or panel.... B. This consists of a wooden or, better still, laminated iron frame with grooves, which supports the glass. The panes must be wider than they are long, overlap by only Om.005 and have a slightly rounded cut. These conditions apply to both diaper and tarpaulin frames, and to greenhouse and orangery frames. Glass should only be covered with 0m,005, because a larger covered surface accommodates a greater quantity of water, which stagnates, freezes and cracks the panes; moreover, the dirt that would inevitably collect there would intercept the light, and the view would be unpleasantly affected. All those who are not dominated by the old and vicious routine will be careful not to give the glass any other arrangement than the one we have just indicated. The rounded cut serves to channel rainwater through the middle of the tiles, preventing it from penetrating the grooves and producing a drip that is always fatal to plants. Those who are more careful - and when it comes to horticulture, you can never be too careful - have the glass fitted in two putties, i.e., the putty is first placed in the iron or wooden grooves, then the panes are fitted and receive the ordinary layer of putty on the outside. They also apply a gray or white oil color to the part of the glass where the panes overlap. This makes it impossible for frozen water to break the panes, and prevents dirt from getting in. For each sash, there must be a zigzag-notched piece of wood, used to open the sash by degrees..... This is called a rack and is sometimes made of iron. Warm layers. - The arrangement of warm layers is the same in all respects as that of hot layers; they differ only in the nature of the fermentable materials used. While stable manure is used for the construction of warm layers, a mixture of litter or manure from other livestock, or leaves either dry or harvested as they fall, or tanning with leaves or litter, all with or without stable manure, is used for these. The same chests and frames are used. Tepid layers, although made of less hot manure, sometimes develop considerable heat; this happens when the manure used contains a fairly large quantity of animal matter and is very damp: in this case, before placing young plants or seeds in it, the heat of the layer should be explored by dipping the hand in it, or, which is better, the degrees of heat are measured by means of a thermometer, which is placed for a few minutes in the soil of the layer. It's not uncommon to see the thermometer mark 80° centigrade in the horse manure of warm layers, imparting 45 to 50° of heat to the soil in the layer. It's easy to see that this heat is far too great, and that you need to wait before sowing or planting until, as gardeners say, the fire has gone out and the thermometer, immersed in the potting soil, registers between 30 and 40 degrees at most. In the same way as for hot layers, we explore the degrees of heat of tepid layers before using them. Heat develops three to four days after the manure has been compacted. Deaf layers. - For the formation of muted layers, half-consumed manure is used, which is no longer likely to heat up much. It only produces a muted heat that is slightly higher than that of the earth surrounding the layer. What further distinguishes deaf-beds is that they are made in spring, cannot be heated with stoves, and instead of frames, cloches are used to cover them at the points where melons or other plants raised on hot beds are planted. Deaf-beds are always built in trenches or in a pit Om,50 to Om,60 deep. Their usual dimensions are Om,70 thick, 1m,30 wide and of indeterminate length. Their topsoil-covered surface will be slightly domed. In spring and late autumn, we are often obliged to shelter the plants from frost under cloches, with litter, leaves or straw mats attached to half-barrel poles and held in place by three transverse rods. Being in more immediate contact with atmospheric air and water, manure decomposes more rapidly and produces more active heat. Layers in which the soil is excavated to place the manure are called "boxed". They are preferable to bordered layers: they look better, are better suited to the arrangement of the manure, and, if they are a little less hot at the beginning, on the other hand their heat is more durable. The use of boiling water, by means of the thermosiphon, combined with manure, produces the safest and easiest heat to direct. Once the initial set-up costs have been met, these layers are more economical in that the quantity of manure can be reduced and, by extending the heat pipes, a large number of layers can be heated at the same time. - All layers are covered with straw mats and other shelter, such as leaves, straw, litter, etc., depending on the intensity of the cold. RACHES. Tarpaulins differ from layers in several respects: in addition to the beds of more or less hot manure they contain in brick boxes, they enable pipes to be laid to conduct heat, either by means of hot air, according to the old system, or by hot water or steam. They are of such dimensions that a standing man can easily walk through them in a corridor known as the service path. Under this pathway are the pipes; it is covered by a ladder-like trellis, the rungs of which, spaced at Om,05 or Om,06, A are Om,07 thick, and which allows the heat released by the pipes to escape freely into the tarpaulin. This mesh should be mobile, so that it can be lifted in the evening, during the most severe frosts, to allow the heat, which is always more or less intercepted by it, to spread completely and unhindered through the tarpaulin. Finally, we can say that tarpaulins are greenhouses in a lesser sense; they often take the place of greenhouses for growing flowers. Since they are almost always not very high, it's easy to cover and uncover them with A straw mats, which protect them from the cold and shelter them from the scorching summer sun. Usually, to provide more humidity for the plants and keep the temperature more even, the ground of the tarpaulin is made Om,50 to 0m,60 lower than the ground outside. In dry or mountainous terrain, this depth can be as much as 1.80 m. In this case, the frames are placed on the front at ground level. The English often grow camellias in these types of covers. They are not well suited to growing vegetables or fruit plants. Vegetables are grown either in the open ground, or in buried pots. They are sown or planted according to the time of year when the vegetables or fruit are to be harvested; cultivation begins at the onset of winter, and continues through spring and summer. Trees grown here include vines, cherries, peaches, apricots and figs. Edible fruit plants include strawberries, melons and pineapples; vegetables include peas, beans, lettuce, radishes and more. Depending on the length of the walls, boards or dressers can be placed on which strawberry plants or flowers can be placed. We can see how much pleasure this kind of small garden can provide, in the middle of winter and the frosty season, where we encounter both the sweet perfumes of spring flowers and the tasty fruits of summer. In the course of this work, we also mention how useful and profitable tarpaulins can be to the horticulturist. FORCED CULTIVATION. VEGETABLES PROPER. ASPARAGUS. Winter asparagus or early asparagus is grown on beds and under glass frames. From the outset, the beds must be laid out in such a way as to be able to accept wooden frames or boxes on which the frames or panels rest. The boards, 1.30 m wide, will be spaced by 0.60 m paths to accommodate the stoves. These boards are lined with three rows of two- to three-year-old asparagus; the plants are spaced 0m,30 apart in all directions, so that on each side of the board there is a free, fairly wide edge. For three years, the asparagus is cared for as in ordinary cultivation. In the fourth year, from November to March, we heat the asparagus: after removing the soil from the paths to a depth of Om.50 to Om.60, we replace it with warm, well-trampled and well-packed manure: we spread this loosened and divided soil over a good 2. 18 layer of potting soil on the beds; we level it off quickly. All that remains to be done is to spread a 0.16 m layer of manure, neither too dry nor too damp, over the entire surface of the bed, and place the boxes and frames on top. If the temperature is cold, we cover the frames with straw mats and never give them air. If the cold becomes very intense, doormats will not suffice; you will have to cover the frames with a thick layer of leaves or long manure and place the doormats on top; similarly, you will have to surround the chests with a similar covering. Twelve or fifteen days after placing the trays, check whether the asparagus are growing, removing a little of the manure. Then remove the manure and renew the stoves, if necessary. After three weeks, the asparagus is ready to be cut. After four or six weeks, you can stop harvesting if you want to preserve the plant. Carefully managed in this way, a forced asparagus plant can last a very long time, and can be heated every two years. The plants recover during a year of rest, and their vigor returns completely. The following year, they can be forced again. The asparagus obtained in this way is called white asparagus; the variety known as Dutch asparagus is the most suitable. In April, we remove the frames, boxes and manure, and return the beds to their previous condition. Green asparagus, also known as pea asparagus, is grown using a different method. In December or March, layers of manure are trampled and tamped down to maintain an elevation of 1.60 m to Om.80 m, and a width of Om.30 m. The boxes are placed on these layers, and the asparagus is then placed on the boards. The trunks are placed on top, followed by a layer of Om,09 to 0m,12 of compost; the frames are placed on top, covered with straw mats and left to catch fire. The roots are shaped, leaving a length of Om, 25 to Om, 30. They are placed upright next to each other, filling in the empty spaces between them with potting soil as the work progresses. Care should be taken to ensure that the crowns of the plants are at the same level; the collars should be lightly covered. After these operations, close the frames and maintain the heat. The asparagus will soon come into vegetation: a layer hardly lasts more than three weeks. Plants that have been used for this type of cultivation are destined for removal. Those involved in large-scale forced cultivation successively plant three or four times during the winter, and make very considerable profits from these plantings. MUSHROOMS. The cultivation of mushrooms offers great benefits to the merchant horticulturist, especially if he lives near large cities: the sale of this plant is always assured. As a foodstuff, mushrooms form a kind of middle ground between plant and animal substances, and their chemical characteristics make them a good match for both; indeed, as with animals, they contain fairly high levels of nitrogen. Like other plants, mushrooms undoubtedly reproduce by a kind of fertilization and fructification, which takes place in a truly mysterious way, and which botanists have tried in vain to understand. The edible mushroom or agaric, which is harvested in late summer in the meadows of Belgium, is also free from poisonous qualities, provided it is harvested and eaten before it begins to putrefy. We know that in this same state, in this beginning of decomposition, animal substances are dangerous and give rise to serious illnesses. As for edible agaric, all danger disappears if it is used before the end of its complete vegetation, and if it is not mixed with other deleterious and dangerous species of mushroom. Healthy, semi-dark cellars, underground passages and quarries free of humidity are the ideal places to grow mushrooms. Mushroom beds need measured levels of humidity and a constant temperature not exceeding 15° R. and not falling below 10° R. of heat. Autumn is a particularly good time to grow mushrooms. And, although success can be achieved at any time, it should be remembered that the most favorable time for cultivating any plant is always that which is closest to the time of its natural vegetation, or, in other words, to the time when the plant begins to develop in the climate it inhabits. Manure preparation. - Urine-impregnated horse manure is generally preferred. In this respect, manure that has been in the stable for a few days is the best. As it comes out, it should be piled up until there is a sufficient quantity. As soon as it has fermented long enough, after five or six weeks, the heap is broken up into a uniform mass, while the cakes formed by humidity and heat are broken up with a fork, and all foreign bodies, such as straw not impregnated with urine, wood and stones, are discarded. Arranged in this way, the manure is transported to the place where the layers are to be formed. Here, squares of Om 75 in height are laid out. Water the parts that are not slightly moist, level them out and beat them firmly with the back of the spade. After an interval of ten to fifteen days, the pile is broken up again; the mass is made as homogeneous as possible, and the grinding stone is erected. This is the name given to the layer of manure destined to produce mushrooms. Millstones. - Grindstones are formed in the shape of a humpback or roof, with a base width of Om, 80 and a height of Om, 60 over any length; they must be neatly arranged and beaten with the back of the shovel. It would be difficult to give an exact description of the degree of consistency of the manure; the gardener's tact and habit should make up for this. However, the manure should be thoroughly mixed, with what was on the outside brought to the center; it should be fat, unctuous and homogeneous. If, by compressing it with force in the hand, liquid were to come out, this would be a very bad sign; there would be reason to doubt the success of the cultivation; therefore, water only during the heat of summer or when the manure is too dry. After four or five days, millstones prepared in this way produce a gentle, long-lasting heat. Now it's time to "larder" them; this operation consists of introducing mushroom spawn onto the surface of the layers. These are whitish, filamentous patches 18. formed from the residues of depleted layers that have supplied many mushrooms. Pieces of this mushroom spawn are inserted into the sides of the layer by making chessboard-shaped openings with the hand, at Om, 16 from one another. These openings must be such that they are closed by the fragments of spawn, 0m,08 to Om, 09 wide and long, which are deposited in them. The manure is pressed lightly all around, and the surface of the grinding wheel is levelled by gently tapping it with the back of the shovel. Make sure that the upper part of each fragment is level with this same surface. As soon as the white has set, which can be recognized by the networks of white filaments crawling over the manure, it is covered with a layer of light earth, about Om, 03 thick. This soil must be neither too dry nor too wet, but in a moist state that will hold it to the walls of the layer, after being carefully levelled with the shovel. If it were too dry, it would have to be moistened with the fine-headed watering can while still being mixed; if it were too damp, dry earth would have to be added. As for the soil used to cover the millstones, a mixture of leaf compost and sand is perfectly suitable. Three to six weeks after the operations just described, the mushrooms start to produce; harvesting takes about two months. Mushroom spawn can be purchased from the mushroom merchants of our major cities; it can also be obtained by first growing it in the layers of manure being prepared, preferably in donkey manure, which is the easiest to spawn, followed by mule and horse manure, the latter being the most widely used because it is readily available. The simplest way to obtain mushroom spawn, if you want to make it yourself, is to place in the cellar, at any time of the year, a quantity of horse manure which has remained in the stable for two weeks and which, as a result, is impregnated with a lot of urine and mixed with a lot of dung. This manure will spontaneously turn white after a certain length of time, but usually after three or four months; it is then all white and musty. In this state, simply spread it to a thickness of Om,07 to 0m,10 over trodden or trampled horse manure; then cover with Om,16 of compost. The surface is levelled and firmed with the back of a shovel. Or, to make it even simpler, we make millstones Om, 80 wide and Om,60 high, which we erect at an angle against the cellar wall; we use manure of the same quality. As soon as the plant has formed, it is covered with potting soil as above, and shaped in the same way. Mushrooms grow there. If the same layer is sprinkled with water in which fresh mushrooms, crushed or cut into pieces, have been washed, the operation is safer. As for harvesting the mushrooms, it's best to pick them every other day, and to take the precaution of rotating them on their pedicel while detaching them, so as not to disturb the tray which is to supply them. After picking, if the soil dries out, lightly baste it, because, as we must repeat, mushrooms like uniform temperature and humidity. Their cultivation in the open ground is fortunate, so they are not widely used; rainfall from storms, or rain that lasts too long, are obstacles to success. It differs little from the cultivation we have just described; only, in the open ground, the layers are wrapped in a straw covering called a chemise, which serves to give them the darkness they naturally find in cellars. Cultivated underground, they are not as white as those grown in the open ground, but their flavor does not differ. For mushroom cultivation, the English take advantage of the walls of the greenhouses they use to force fruits and vegetables, or to shelter flowers. Against these walls, on northern exposures, they erect a tile or slate roof that rests at the bottom on a supporting wall high enough not to interfere with service. Along the entire length of this kind of greenhouse, on both sides of the pathway that runs through the middle, there are shelved dressers on which the layers or grindstones are placed, prepared as mentioned above, although it should be noted that they prefer pure manure to stable manure. It should also be noted that the heat-conducting pipes must continue their course in these constructions, and that there is usually a ceiling under the roof to better conserve heat. Mushrooms can also be grown in temperate greenhouses, and even in hot ones. Wooden crates Om, 25 to Om, 30 high, of indeterminate width and length, with a very wide-mesh wire bottom, are placed on legs, so that the heated air surrounds them on all sides; straw or small branches are placed at the bottom of these crates, followed by manure, which is suitably compacted. When the first heat has passed, lay the spawn in large slabs and cover the whole with a layer of 0.03 m thick turf with light, loose soil. Water in due course, and note that mushrooms need not be protected from air circulation. Parisians cultivate their mushrooms almost exclusively in the immense quarries from which building stone is extracted, and which have been considerably enlarged since Paris was surrounded by its walls: the consumption of this plant is prodigious; it is estimated that three million baskets of mushrooms are sold annually in this metropolis, not counting what passes through the départements. In these underground tunnels, the Parisians place their millstones in two rows, with a service path in the middle. They prepare the horse manure in the open air, forming large piles which they wet and rework several times, until it has acquired the necessary moisture and smoothness. It is then layered in the underground, larded with the spawn and gobbled (covered) with light earth, as described above. If a mushroom layer doesn't work, don't blame the gardener. For, in spite of the best care, in absolutely identical circumstances and conditions, we have seen mushroom beds of the best cultivation fail, without anyone being able to notice this accident. Fertilizer from green-fed animals should never be used; it is the use of this fertilizer that is attributed as one of the causes of failure. Cellars should also be kept draught-free. Vulgar gardeners, or those infatuated with a routine they don't want to deviate from, sometimes attribute their disappointments to rainbows or thunderstorms. We won't discuss these prejudices here. The edible mushroom (agaricus edulis, Bull.) is medium-sized, white on top, pinkish underneath, fleshy, brittle, peelable, with a pleasant smell and taste. Belgian horticulturists such as Van Sterbeck, Necker, Van den Spiegel and d'Hoogvorst have successfully cultivated mushrooms. CAULIFLOWER. Cauliflower seedlings sown between August 25 and September 25, and to be harvested in April or early May, are grown on a bed in November as follows: a mixture of half horse manure and half cow manure is used, so that the bed does not heat up too much and lose heat too quickly. Eight days before the layer is to be smoked, it is placed in a heap so that it heats up properly and settles evenly; in frosty weather, it is covered with straw. Then, after arranging it in layers, we trample it. As soon as it reaches a thickness of Om.60, we lay the boxes and frames on top. Leave the layer in this state for eight days, opening up the frames a little; then cover it with Om, 30 to Om, 35 of good compost that is not too light. For a few days afterwards, the pile is turned so that it heats up completely, and the cauliflowers are planted from December 1st to December 10th, in a checkerboard pattern, at a distance of Om,40 to Om, 50 in all directions. This space can be filled with radish and lettuce seedlings. The cauliflowers should be given air every day, unless the temperature does not allow it. As soon as the plants touch the windows, we raise the boxes by placing them on manure, taking care to fill the void. At the end of March or beginning of April, you can remove the frames and, a little later, the boxes, which are then used to grow melons. Water the cauliflowers generously, but always in the morning. When the apples begin to develop, they are covered by bending the lower leaves inwards; they form more quickly and better than if left exposed to the light. The second planting of cauliflowers is done in December, and the third in January, still in the same way as above. In February, cauliflowers are still planted on beds, but they have already taken over from other early crops, such as radishes, lettuces, etc., and the beds on which they are grown have given off their heat. ENDIVES. In February, Italian endive seed is sown on a very warm bed. The seed must be old; those six years old and older set perfectly well and set seed with difficulty, which is necessary for spring cultivation of this plant. The seed is broadcast and must be very lightly covered; it sprouts in a short time under the frame covered with a mat or matting. Air is only given once the plant has emerged, and if the weather is fine during the day, the mats are only put back at night. Fifteen days later, the seedling is strong enough to be transplanted to another bed, where it is planted out at a distance of about Om.05 cm. It is watered and covered with straw mats for one or two days to ensure a good start. About a month after transplanting, it can be placed at a distance of Om 25 in all directions, in a new layer on which Om, 15 to Om, 20 of compost has been spread. All the rest of the cultivation is limited to watering in the morning, if necessary; providing air when the temperature permits, and putting up the frames on cold nights. GREEN BEANS. Properly managed, forced cultivation of beans is unlikely to be unsuccessful. It can be started in the first days of February; a temperature of 16° Réaumur, successively raised to 18 and 20 0 degrees, is the most suitable. A layer is formed and covered with Om, 15 of potting soil; boxes, frames and, if it's freezing, straw mats are placed. Four or five days later, sow dwarf French beans and flageolet, the best varieties for forcing. Runner beans are earlier than flageolet beans, but the latter are hardier. The distance between clumps should be Om, 25 in all directions; each clump is made up of two or three plants spaced Om, 04 apart. They should be covered with Om, 02 potting soil only. The frames and straw mats are placed immediately. As soon as the beans have sprouted, they are given air every day, weather permitting. The weather can be fine and very cold at the same time, so it must be implied here that, depending on the temperature, the frames will be opened more or less, gradually from Om,01 to Om,10 in February, and from Om,10 to Om,60 in March. But this graduation is not absolute, and the gardener will have to adjust according to the degree of cold. Beans are also sown in rays, and when they have formed their first two leaves, they are transplanted to another layer at the same depth as before transplanting. The trays are immediately closed, and the mats put back in place to ensure the young plant's recovery. Beans should be transplanted very young, as their success becomes doubtful as soon as they are transplanted, when they have their fourth leaf. Beans sown in February already bear in March or early April, and for two months provide their pods under the name of green beans. Care should be taken to water moderately, without wetting the flowers or leaves. During flowering, hariCULTURE MARAICHÈRE. 2. 1e cots under frame conditions require air and light; in this respect, their cultivation benefits greatly when heated by thermosiphon or hot water: the heat, produced here uniformly and without any interruption, enables the temperature to be raised from 20 to 25 degrees, and to give, so to speak, daylight at will; whereas ordinary beds must be covered with their straw mats, night and day, if the cold is more or less intense. In March, in Belgium's climate, beans are still grown on beds, as described above. At the beginning of April, they are also forced into the ground at a very young age, and covered with cloches during cold nights and days. In this way, we bring forward their natural growth, which doesn't take place in the open ground until the first fortnight of May. In the big cities, forced beans find an easy and secure placement. In Paris, as in London, it is not uncommon to see them selling for 5 to 30 francs a kilogram in winter. LETTUCE. Passion, morine, crêpe and petite noire lettuces are the most suitable for forcing. Crêpe and petite noire, so called because of the color of their seeds, are better suited to this type of cultivation than the other two: they can withstand air deprivation during cold weather. In August, September and up to October, they are sown in well-tilled soil, the surface of which is covered with Om.05 to Om.10 of compost. Lightly cover the seed, press down with the back of the spade and, four or five days after sowing, water if the weather is dry. As soon as the lettuces have two leaves, in addition to their cotyledons, they are transplanted in place on layers that need not be very thick. Om,30 to Om, 35 of well-packed manure covered with Om, 25 to Om, 30 of good garden soil mixed with potting compost, are enough. Chassis windows should not be far from the lettuces, but as close to them as possible. Any plant that vegetates quickly and goes through the phases of its life without resting, loves daylight. Lettuces that have been bedded in October and properly cared for will be ready for harvesting in December, under a frame or cloche. At the end of October or beginning of November, lettuces are again sown on beds, unless there are still good plants available from previous sowings; in this case, the best ones are selected; they are then transplanted onto new beds, where they will flower in January. In December, January and February, we continue sowing in the same way, to transplant the seedlings onto a slightly warmer bed: the manure will be packed to a thickness of Om.45 to Om.60, and covered with soil and compost, as we said earlier. The seed should be sown lighter than for autumn sowing. As soon as the seedlings are placed under a bell or under a frame, you need to pay close attention to the care you need to give them. Covering the frames with straw mats during cold spells, increasing these covers when the cold increases, covering them with litter or leaves as the cold becomes more intense, providing air whenever the temperature permits - these are the continuous care requirements for almost all forced cultivation. The heat of the manure layers can vary for lettuces from 10 to 15° Réaumur. Plant spacing should be approximately Om, 20 to Om, 25 staggered. From autumn to the time of the new head lettuces, we sow the seed of lettuces to be cut every two weeks. For this purpose, we use the lettuces listed above. They are sown very thickly to cut small lettuces at the root collar as soon as they have their fourth leaf. All lettuces without distinction can be used for this purpose; two varieties in particular are particularly well-suited to this purpose: chicory lettuce and spinach lettuce. Spinach can be cut several times at intervals of a few days. PEAS. Tarpaulins are undoubtedly the best place to establish layers for forcing peas. Unfortunately, tarpaulins, which are nothing more than small greenhouses heated with manure or by thermosiphon, are not available to everyone. Usually, peas are simply forced onto ordinary warm layers, which are thinned out so that they don't generate too much heat. The first seedlings are sown at the beginning of November, and can be continued fortnightly until the end of January. The soil in which the peas are transplanted or planted should be lukewarm. Om, 38 to Om, 45 of packed manure covered with Om, 35 of good loose soil, a little earthy if you like, but not too oily, are perfectly suitable. If the layer of soil covering the manure is thinner, the roots may penetrate into the manure itself; in this case, vegetation is exuberant; the peas are carried away and produce beautiful foliage without fruit. On a bed as described above, which is 1°, 30 wide by an indeterminate length, you can space the rows Om, 20 apart and sow 3 to 5 pea seeds per pocket spaced Om, 15 apart. When the peas are about 20 cm high, you can bed them by tilting them to the higher side of the frame and placing light slats over the feet of the plants. The purpose of this operation is to hasten flowering and encourage the emergence of lateral stems, which increase the yield. After four or five days, the inclined stems straighten out, at which point the laths should be removed. If the temperature is mild, the frames should be opened every day. Normally, only four flowers are left on each stem, and the others are removed by cutting off the tips of the terminal shoots. Peas can be grown in the same way in a tarpaulin, except that they can be given oars, and they grow more quickly because they don't have to block the light by covering the windows with mats to prevent the cold from penetrating, especially if you use thermosiphon heating. In greenhouses where vines or cherry trees are grown, they are best planted along the walls, on the beds where the trees are located. In this case, all you need to do is provide them with stakes at the right time, and water them if the soil is too dry. 19. Another inexpensive method, often used, is to sow the plants thickly against a south-facing wall in late October or early November. As soon as the peas have reached a height of om, 06 to 0m, 08, they are planted in a trench about Om, 15 deep and appropriate in width and length to the frames intended to cover them. They are planted in good garden soil, without a layer of manure, at the distance we have indicated above, and conforming in all other respects to the other rules prescribed for growing early peas. PURSLANE. Purslane is sown on a bed from January to March; the manure is loaded with Om, 10 to Om, 15 of loam only. Then sow without covering the seed or with very little coverage. If the compost is damp enough, do not water; if the surface dries out, lightly baste with a watering can with a fine-holed head. We prefer to grow the variety known as golden purslane (Portulaca sativa E). Forced cultivation of this vegetable is rarely practised, but it deserves it in every respect. Purslane is a very healthy and refreshing plant. If you treat it as we have just described, you can use it up almost two months sooner than if you grow it in the open ground without a frame. As we know, it can't be sown in the open ground before the end of April or the beginning of May. You can harvest purslane five or six weeks after sowing it in a bed. FORCED CULTIVATION. ROOT VEGETABLES. -- BATATE. Convolvulus batatas, a member of the convolvulaceae family, is native to South America. Batate is the name given by the natives to this precious plant which, in their country, grows without care or cultivation, like bindweed in our hedgerows. It is to be regretted that in Belgium we have to abandon the cultivation of a plant of such eminent value: in our country, it requires a warm greenhouse; it can be grown as a simple curiosity in a pineapple greenhouse. Obviously, it can never be grown in the open ground with any hope of covering the cultivation costs, unless a robust variety is obtained. Nature rarely gives plants qualities in their natural soil that they would need in other climates. Batatas were introduced to Europe at the end of the 16th century. Several well-educated horticulturists made attempts to cultivate or acclimatize it; among them the illustrious André Thouin was one of the most zealous, but their efforts were not crowned with success. If you wanted to try growing this plant in the open ground, you'd have to put the tubers on a bed and under a frame as early as March or April, at a distance of Om, 80, and cover them with cloches like melons. A few days after planting, numerous shoots appear, which can be cut into small pots under cloches and on a warm bed, buried right up to the edges. These cuttings are used for planting, which is always done on a bed, or in the greenhouse or against a wall facing south. They are harvested in October. Tubers are not easy to store: they must be placed alternately in beds of dry sand, in a crate in a dry place where the heat does not fall below 10° Réaumur. The varieties of batate or potato are: yam, yellow batate, violet, red and white. TUBEROUS NASTURTIUM. We mention in passing this food plant, whose tubers can be kept from one year to the next without wilting or sprouting, in a dry, frost-free place. It has this advantage over all other root vegetables. But what hinders its cultivation is that the plant does not go through its vegetative phases quickly enough, in the open ground, in Belgium's climate. From May to October, it doesn't fully ripen, as beans and potatoes do. Cultivation begins on a warm bed towards the end of January, and is completed in the open ground. Here's how: Tubers are planted at Om, 10 apart, covered with Om, 03 earth only. They soon produce numerous shoots, from which cuttings are made under cloches in very small pots. As soon as the roots have formed, which takes from fifteen to twenty days, the cloches are removed. In the first days of April, we plant them in the open ground, under cloches, in substantial, loose, sandy soil; we mound the stems several times, as they grow: by this operation, we obtain a greater number of tubers. Tubers can also be planted in the open ground around April 15th, but they must always be protected by cloches to prevent light frosts from destroying the young stems. The strong, peppery flavor of tuberous nasturtium (mayna or tropœolum tuberosum) is not to everyone's taste. Entire populations of South America make this plant their usual food. The raw, sliced tubers are used to season our salads. CARROT. The Dutch carrot is the earliest and most suitable of all for forced cultivation. In December, warm beds are planted with equal parts of soil and compost. Heat is kept to a minimum in the early stages, gradually rising from 10 to 20 degrees. Air is breathed in from time to time, and the soil is lightly basked if the surface dries out, which is quite rare, since the humid exhalation of hot manure successively penetrates the soil on which the carrots are sown and maintains a suitable, moderate moisture level. If watering is necessary, however, it should be done with distilled water, which is a general rule for all watering of bedded plants. The compacted layer of manure should be about Om, 60 thick; the mixture of soil and compost should be Om, 35 thick. Carrot seedlings continue in January and February; those sown in December yield at the end of March and in April. Thinning is done as soon as the young plants are the size of a little finger. At the end of February, and throughout March and April, we take great care to open the frames to prevent sunburn or excessively high temperatures, which are so harmful to bedding plants. Half an hour in which the sun beams down on the glass can sometimes mean the loss of all hope of harvesting, and all the trouble you've gone to. In May, if there are still carrots on the bed from seedlings sown in December and January, the frames are lifted: the plants, already strong, stand up well to the open air and even acquire a more delicate flavour. For seedlings sown in March and early April, we don't remove the trays in May, but we smear them inside with chalk crushed in whey; or, better still, we cover them with a lath that sufficiently intercepts the sun's rays while leaving the plants enough light. During this month, the frames should be open during the day and closed only at night. Parsnips and radishes. - Parsnips and round and half-round pink radishes are grown in exactly the same way; except that for radishes, forced cultivation is not repeated until March, because by then they have already been sown in the open ground under cover and with good exposure. POTATOES. The forced cultivation of potatoes can, in some cases, be lucrative for the merchant gardener: we know that the early products of this plant easily find buyers who give rather high prices for them, especially if the gardener can offer them in March or April; because he has to conform to the taste, even to the oddity of his world. There are those who always prefer new potatoes, whatever the season, regardless of the precious qualities of these perfectly ripe tubers, which are abundant in starch and constitute a most wholesome food. The English have such a predilection for new potatoes that they prefer them to the best late-season potatoes. To obtain potatoes very early, in March or April, we plant whole tubers of the earliest varieties in January and February, on a warm bed and under a frame, such as: early dwarf, marjolin (kidney early), yellow goat's horn. These varieties produce short stems and can be quite close together, at Om, 20 or Om, 25 in all directions. The soil covering the manure layer should be good, rich garden soil with no recent fertilization. Plant to such a depth that the tubers 14 are covered with Om, 03 to 0m, 04 of this soil. As soon as their stems are Om, 10 high, they are ridged; a few days later, they are ridged again. The remaining care consists in covering them with straw mats at night, uncovering them in the morning, and giving them air when the temperature permits. DISLESd=COC FORCED CROPS. VEGETABLE PLANTS WITH EDIBLE FRUIT. ANANAS. For a long time, pineapple cultivation remained restricted; it was shrouded in mystery and charlatanism, and because of this its delicious fruit was only accessible to the wealthy, and appeared only on the table of kings. Thanks to gardeners of good faith, to lovers of the truth, the day was made; and it is to them that we owe all the progress made by horticultural science. Preferring a just reputation and the esteem of their fellow citizens to monopoly and lucre, they made themselves worthy of their country, and made it share in their discoveries and the good processes of their cultivation. The English have taken a special interest in the cultivation of this plant. Their methods, followed exactly or modified, have been adopted by other nations: in Belgium, Holland, France, Germany, Russia, and so on. A child of the tropics, this plant absolutely 2. 20 wants the temperature of its native country, at least for the time needed to ripen its fruit. In warm regions, where it grows spontaneously, the fruit is infinitely better and much more fragrant than here. The degree of artificial heat required to grow this plant has led to an error that has put off many enthusiasts. It was generally believed that a hot greenhouse or purpose-built tarpaulin, heated almost continuously, was required. This theory, or rather this error, has disappeared. Today, we know that it's not difficult to grow this precious fruit without a fire or hearth. A warm layer of good tannin is all it takes: stable manure covered with a layer of tannin, or the same manure mixed in layers with leaves, are all ways of producing sufficient and healthy artificial heat. The pineapple is no more difficult to grow than the early cucumber, but the fruit always fetches a very high price; rarely does it sell for less than 5 francs; more often it goes for 10, 15 and even 20 francs. It's true that you have to wait for the fruit, and the manure, time and labor costs lavished on it by the grower have to be taken into account; but the fact remains that the product yields, after deduction of all costs, an interest rate of 25 percent. Those starting out in this field should be circumspect in their choice of carnations, taking only the best known varieties or species. Those growing for sale will do well to choose Antigoa violet; it combines to an eminent degree the two conditions that make it so popular for this purpose, i.e. volume and quality. The English call it black Jamaica. The following species are also very good and widely cultivated: the queen, the Muscovite queen, the thornless Cayenne pineapple; they are early-ripening; their fruits, less voluminous, are exquisitely tasty. The following two species, one of which we have already mentioned, are preferable for the sales gardener who is keen to produce large fruit: Trinidad pineapple and Antigoa violet. Pineapples require good, substantial, light, soft soil. The Germans recommend the following compost, and say it's one of the best known: "Cut some peaty loam sod in a meadow, and pile it up without dividing or stirring it. As soon as this peaty loam is to be used, it is broken up by hand, and, to make it more nourishing, a quarter of one of the following ingredients is added to it: butcher's blood, bones, intestines and butcher's debris, or cow dung without straw or other residues. Any of these substances must be fermented, dried and pulverized. Finally, a small amount of lime can be added for better binding. Other compost: - Mix two parts normal earth, one part heather earth, one part potting soil and one part fatty manure. This mixture should be prepared at least six months in advance. The English recommend the following mixture, which dispenses with the need for heather soil, which is difficult to obtain in some localities: In the first spring, sods of Om, 06 to 0m, 10 thick are raised on a lawn, the soil of which must be a fat, substantial earth. The best are those found in a meadow whose soil consists of a frank, soft, yellowish earth. They are laid out in a pasture where sheep are frequently driven, so that they are well polluted with urine and excrement. At the end of summer, these lawns are well divided by the spade, and piled to form a homogeneous mass. Once a month, the pile is turned over, and after six months the mixture can be used. If you can leave it longer before using it, it will be all the better. Don't put it through a sieve; it will become too compact. This soil should not be used pure; especially for young plants, leaf compost and sand should be added in the following proportion: three parts of the above-mentioned soil, one part leaf compost and two parts coarse sand. For plants ready to bear fruit, three parts of compost are mixed with two parts of potting soil and a little chimney soot. Either of these composts can make pineapples thrive, under the guidance of a vigilant gardener. We'd like to point out a fourth compost which requires little care and which we consider to be very good: In a meadow whose soil is soft, light and yellowish (i.e. composed of good free soil; - almost all meadows in Belgium contain it; the provinces of Antwerp, Brabant, East and West Flanders especially provide this excellent free soil; It is not compact and contains sufficient sand), we cut sods from Om,06 to 0m, 10 thick; we place two or three layers of these sods on top of each other, and then a layer of leaves from Om, 20 to Om, 30 thick. Continue in this way until the pile has the right volume for the use and quantity of pineapples you intend to grow. Every month or every six weeks, this compost is turned over and a few buckets of liquid manure are poured into it, or a dozen buckets, assuming that the heap is 3a.50 wide in all directions and 1m.50 high. This soil can be used after a year's time; if you can leave it for two years, so much the better; but then you just have to turn it over every three months. When you start using it, add enough sand if the turf you're using isn't sandy enough on its own. Alternatively, when the first layer of turf and leaves has been laid, a layer of sand two inches (Om.06) thick can be added. In this case, the sand becomes impregnated with the liquid manure and the whole is more homogeneous. This mixture can be used indiscriminately for plants of any age. However, the quantity of sand can be increased for the multiplication of crowns and eyelets. The following compost can also be used: One third normal earth or free earth - this is known to be composed of clay and sand, in a suitable proportion; - one third heather earth and one third good compost, consisting of well-consumed cow manure with a lot of dung. These substances must have been mixed and stirred several times during the year. It is bad practice, as some authors advise, to store pineapple soils and composts in sheds or otherwise, sheltered from the rain: by drying out, fertilizers lose their virtues; it is preferable to leave them 20. freely in contact with atmospheric agents. If the soil is too wet when you need to use it, it's easy to bring a quantity indoors; it dries out properly in a few days. We advise those who have not yet grown pineapples to start in June. We repeat: anyone who has a garden and can set up a bed under a frame can grow pineapples. This is no longer in doubt today, whereas in the past it was impossible to grow pineapples unless you had a warm greenhouse or tarpaulins built specifically for the purpose. Large growers in particular can cultivate pineapples at almost no cost. They can set up the tarpaulins on the south side of the barns or stables, and have little to pay for them other than the glass frames and small walls on the front and sides of the tarpaulin. None of the stable manure they use goes to waste; it is consumed in the tarpaulin and converted into excellent potting soil for all root crops. As for the laborers, they sometimes have sons who would find it a happy occupation, or a servant intelligent enough to be trained in a short time. To create a pineapple bed, we look for a way to supply ourselves with crowns or carnations in June, and we keep them ready for planting at the end of the month. You can buy them from restaurateurs in our big cities or from castle gardeners. - In Europe, pineapples don't multiply by seed, but here, as with all plants that don't produce seeds in abundance, nature provides in another way: pineapples produce sufficient young shoots on the stem and at the root collar. These young shoots are called "eyelets": they are true cuttings. The fruit also ends in a bundle of leaves called a crown; this is another cutting, and is even preferred to eyelets, because they are generally considered to develop more rapidly. As for eyelets, those at the top of the stem are preferred to those at the root collar or at the base of the stem. Sometimes the crowns are not very sharp, so they should be rejected. Crowns that do not have at least Om.20 circumference at the heel should also be rejected. - The base of the crown and eyelets is called the heel. - Once the crowns or eyelets are detached, the heel is levelled with a sharp knife, and the cuttings are left to rest for eight days to three weeks. All parts of the pineapple are very succulent; a lot of moisture transpires from the freshly cut heel; if planted in this state and without the wound having healed, the young plant would be prone to rot. As soon as a sufficient number of seedlings are available to fill a bed, this is made up of new stable manure mixed with leaves. This mixture, or alternating beds of manure and leaves, produces strong, long-lasting heat. We're not saying it's stronger than unmixed stable manure, but it's longer-lasting. As pineapples tolerate high temperatures well, it would never be appropriate for horse manure to be too thin, i.e. it must contain a large quantity of excrement, and straw must not be overabundant. Once the layer of manure has been compacted and levelled, it is covered with 0.32 m of new tannin. The pineapple is a plant that bears fruit before the third year is up. Sometimes it produces after eighteen months. This is mainly the case with the early species. Pineapple cultivation is divided into three periods, each lasting about a year. As a consequence of this division, the greenhouse must have three compartments, or three separate tarpaulins, available for when they are needed. Heat must also be graduated according to these three periods. In the first year, we form what we call the nursery, i.e. the planting and management of young plants. In pots with a diameter of Om,10 to Om,15 and a depth of Om,18 to 0m,20, and with three slits in the bottom to allow water to run off, place coarse sand or gravel at Om,03 or 0m,04 high; then fill them with compost, preferably one made up of one-third free-range soil, one-third heather soil and one-third potting compost, made from cow manure and left to stand in the open air for a year. By mixing these three ingredients instantly, you can use them for cuttings just as well as if they had been mixed for a year. At the time of use, the soil must be in a suitable state of moisture, but not so wet that it can be kneaded between the fingers. Do not pack it into the pots, but fill them so that it forms a rounded mound, the top of which rises 0.07 to 0.08 m above the rim of the pot. Push the heel of the cutting into the middle of this light soil, to the depth of Om, 05 to 0m, 06, without making an opening other than by the pressure of the heel; then compress the soil all around the base of the eyecup, using both hands. If, while compressing, you find that the cutting and the soil are sinking too much, add a little soil; if, after firming, there is still too much soil in the pot, remove some until the rim of the pot is free of about Om, 010 to Om, 015. This method is the best of all, not only for pineapples, but for all cuttings without exception. Then bury all the pots in rows of the same height in the tan layer, taking care to ensure that the windows of the frames on the roof are very close to the plants, without touching them. If planted in spring, cover the frames with straw mats during the night, if it's cold, and with clear canvas during the day, if it's hot. Three to four weeks later, the cuttings are rooted, as can be seen from the young shoots and new roots. At this point, we start to water them properly, without wetting the heart of the plant, as this could rot the cuttings that have not yet taken root. As the weather warms up and the plants grow, we increase the watering, and above all we wet the young plant with the fine rain given by means of the fine-headed syringe. It's essential that the water used for watering has been kept in a greenhouse or tarpaulin, so that it doesn't reach a temperature much lower than that of the pineapples. Assuming that planting has been carried out from spring to June or July, we commonly wait until October before placing the plants on a new warm layer, made as before of new manure mixed with leaves. On this layer, either in a tarpaulin or in the warm greenhouse, the pineapple overwinters. Care is taken to cover them carefully with good mulch during the cold months. Six months after planting, the pineapples are changed into new pots, so that those planted in spring are transferred before winter, and those planted in autumn are repotted after winter. The new pots should be around Om, 17 to 0m, 20 in diameter; the soil should also be renewed; it can be made from the same mix as for the cuttings. Examine the roots, cleaning them of any rot, but without injuring the healthy roots: injuries to living pineapple roots are fatal. O2 loosens some of the old soil, thus increasing the dose of new soil and giving the plant stronger vegetation. However, it's worth pointing out that, when repotting, the pots must not be too large: the plant would then grow too vigorously and fruiting would be considerably delayed. In the first year, pineapples can be forced to bear fruit by heat. This process is flawed; it's better to wait until the second and even better the third year before making them bear fruit. The English usually wait until the third year, when they have bigger and better fruit. In the third year, the pineapples need to be re-potted; by this time, the plants are fully developed; they are also given soil as before: the potting soil used could be in greater quantities, or, leaving the ingredients in the proportions indicated above, they can be watered from time to time in spring with an excellent and powerful liquid fertilizer, which consists of a mixture of columbine, sheep dung and water. For this last repotting, the pots are about Om, 25 to 0m, 30 in diameter. The three periods of pineapple cultivation are determined by the age of the plants. Suitable soil and well-graduated heat are the main elements of this crop. In the first year, the temperature of the tarpaulins should vary from 8° to 20° R., depending on the season. Too much heat is dangerous: it causes pineapples to bear fruit. In the second year, if you don't want the young plants to fructify, the temperature should be graduated between 12° and 25° R. During the third year, the true fructification period, the most intense heat is the most suitable: it cannot be below 30° R. and can rise to 45° R. without any inconvenience. When the sun is shining, the frames are rarely opened, but shade is provided by loosely-fitting gray linen. During the day, water the slabs or paths several times, using tarpaulins or greenhouses. As soon as vegetation becomes stationary, stop watering; this is done in winter. There are no fixed rules for watering in summer: plants are watered when they are thirsty. Some authors, however, recommend watering once a week in spring and autumn, and twice a week in summer. These precepts are flawed; watering should be adjusted according to circumstances. The same is true of giving air; pineapples are often given air, but it may be appropriate, even on the hottest days, not to give air; this is done, for example, when there is a hot, dry wind, which carries away dust and dirties the plants. In this case, it's best to cover the frames with canvas, as we've said. These small operations, which together contribute greatly to good cultivation, must be carried out at the right time and as the gardener sees fit. The cloths can be placed inside or outside the tarpaulins; it is preferable to apply them inside, because in the latter case they are not exposed to the rain and wind that wear them out more quickly. These tarpaulins are held in place by cylinders, so that they can be raised or lowered at will by means of two ropes. In very cold weather, the frames are covered with straw mats, mats or plank shelves that fit into the grooves. This last covering, since it completely intercepts the light, should only be used during the coldest weather, and only at night. When pineapples are treated in tarpaulins with no heat other than that of the manure, a tarpaulin must be available for when the exhausted layer needs to be renewed. The same applies to tanning; it hardly keeps sufficient heat for more than three months. The gentle heat of tanning is usually combined with that of steam or boiling water. When this artificial heat is used instead of the heat produced by manure, the tannage can be passed through the pipes conducting the steam or boiling water, or the tarpaulins or greenhouse can be passed through these same pipes, either around the perimeter of the layers, or under the paths, if paths are provided all around them. As for water heat, it undoubtedly provides excellent warmth; but this means of heating is not within everyone's reach, and it would be especially difficult to apply to small-scale cultivation; whereas we have seen, and see every day, this water vapor being lost in large factories: what a precious and easy means of establishing warm greenhouses for pineapples or other tropical plants! The only costs here would be those of the initial set-up, i.e. the side and front walls, and the glass frames. We estimate that pineapple crops grown in this way could produce 50 p. c. of interest. The pineapple (bromelia ananas, Linn.) was dedicated by Linnaeus to his friend Bromel, a Swedish botanist. This plant belongs to the Bromeliaceae family, with firm, gutter-shaped leaves extending from the root collar, with saw-like spines along the edges. In the middle, a strong stem supports a spike of bluish flowers ending in a crown of small leaves. These flowers are followed by three-lobed berries crowned with calyx lobes; together, these berries form a pulpy, pyramidal mass resembling a pine cone, growing from Om, 10 to 0m, 30 in height. A large number of varieties of pineapple are known; here are the main ones: yellow pineapple, a pyramid-shaped, golden-yellow fruit; sugar loaf pineapple, more elongated, larger; Montserrat pineapple (one of the West Indies), a little greenish, one of the best; kidney apple pineapple, oval, small, greenish, 2. 21 pineapple; the white pineapple, oval, orange-yellow, with white, acidic flesh; the thornless pineapple or pitte, with small fruit and non-spiny leaves; the latter appears to be a distinct species; it grows in the woods of Cayenne; Its narrow leaves are 1.00 m long and longer, and are used in this country, where it is hardly cultivated, to make ropes, as is done in the West Indies with agave americana and agave fœtida. The Mahipouri pineapple is grown in Cayenne; its purple, conical fruit is of good quality, with a height of Om, 25 to Om, 30. It is thought to be the same as the Providence pineapple. - The following are still grown: red pineapple, oval fruit, very elongated, pleasant yellow when ripe; pineapple with large purple fruit, round, not very fragrant; new pineapple, with large fruit, weighing up to 9 or 10 kilograms; giant pineapple, lemon-yellow fruit, sweet, melting, height from Om, 25 to Om.30; negro pineapple, with large fruit, weighing up to 9 or 10 kilograms.The pyramidal pineapple with variegated leaves, long, yellow fruit, excellent, leaves striped with red, green and yellow. - There are still other species or varieties; sometimes the same variety has several names, as is the case with almost all plants that pass through the hands of different gardeners. The name pineapple was given to this plant by the Portuguese, from nana, the name given to it by the natives of Brazil. It is very widespread in both Indies, where it grows spontaneously in savannahs and damp, sandy places. According to some naturalists, it originated in the equatorial parts of America, from where it was brought to Indostan by missionaries during the reign of Emperor Akbar. It was also brought from the West Indies by a horticulturist from Leiden, Holland. According to the learned Professor Ch. Morren, to whom Belgian horticulture owes eminent progress, the pineapple was introduced and cultivated in Belgium by the Abbots of Afflighem, long before 1633. Pineapple buds usually appear in October; the fruit ripens at various times, which is more of an advantage than a disadvantage, both for the gardener and the amateur. If such an excellent fruit only had a very short season, the gardener would have to get rid of it at all costs, and the amateur would have too much for consumption. We have already mentioned that the cultivation of this plant is divided into three periods, and that three covers under glass frames are therefore necessary for repotting, which takes place in the spring of each year. If pineapples are grown in a greenhouse heated by the combined heat of manure and thermosiphon, the same greenhouse can have three compartments separated by glass partitions. It is not strictly necessary to grow pineapples in pots; they can be planted in a layer of greasy compost, in the tarpaulin or in the greenhouse; they benefit extraordinarily from this method. However, this method of cultivation has one drawback: it is impossible to put the plant back into pots without removing all its roots, and it has to be reduced once again to the state of cuttings; but, singularly enough, the plant can withstand being martyred in this way without any noticeable delay in vegetation. So, taking them out of the ground, we cut off all the roots, without sparing any; we plant it again and treat it like cuttings, i.e., after putting it in pots, we keep it under a frame, deprived of air and shaded for a few days. This type of pineapple planting is commonly called "bare-bottomed". It is based on the fact that pineapples, whose roots renew themselves every year, do not tolerate injury to their roots: the rotting and pruning that would be harmful to pineapples, in order to put them in pots after having removed them from the ground, means that the roots have to be completely removed, leaving nature to give them new ones. In some countries, there is so little fear of subjecting the pineapple to this operation, that we don't even bother to preserve the roots during decanting, when there would be no disadvantage in keeping them; it's true, as we've already said, that experience has shown that the delays caused to vegetation by this manipulation are not very noticeable; However, for our part, we prefer repotting with preservation of the plant's main nutritional organs whenever possible, i.e. whenever transplanting can be done without significantly damaging the roots. This latter method is followed by the English: in transplanting, they keep all the roots healthy, and cut out all those that are altered or aged. The French, on the other hand, generally follow the method of cutting out all roots, or bare potting. Pineapples are called triennial by gardeners; considered from the point of view of botanical principles, the plant is perennial. It doesn't die after bearing fruit; it produces sprays that continue to grow and develop; by cutting off all but one of the eyelets, it will produce a plant that, in turn, will bear fruit. There's no need to use this method, given the ease of reproduction by eyelets and crowns. Only a few growers keep these old plants to propagate rare species. Pineapples are often infested, as are cacti and aloes, with a species of whitish scale insect. This enemy of the plant is commonly known as the louse, and is destroyed by means of a concentrated infusion of tobacco, as follows: the leaves of the plant are bound together without injury; the soil of the pot is covered with moss, which is tied tightly with a ligature. Once this is done, plunge the whole plant, stem inverted, into the infusion in a suitably large tub. The plant can remain in the infusion at a temperature of 25° to 30° R., for 8 to 10 minutes, without the slightest inconvenience. The plant is then hung upside down to drain. After this operation, most insects are destroyed. Some authors advise repotting plants for this purpose: we consider this work, if not harmful, at least useless; the roots are not attacked by the insect, only the leaves; then, unnecessary repotting is always an unpleasant task. We have already said that it is not difficult to grow pineapples without the use of a fireplace; we have said how the farmer can, at little cost, give himself great profit and pleasure at the same time by this cultivation; we have said how the industrialist who employs steam engines can use the one that is lost; we have one piece of advice left to give to the rich owner who freely disposes of his capital. We advise him to grow pineapples, at least those of the third year, in the open ground, 21. in tarpaulins or greenhouses; the vegetation is then magnificent, and the plants, more robust in all their parts, give bigger and tastier fruit. We're not saying that this process is absolutely new, no; but it's not practiced enough. AUBERGINE. In January or February, eggplants are sown on a bed.

and under a frame covered with straw mats. The layer should be made up of Om, 60 of compacted manure, covered with about Om, 25 of good garden soil. The seed, which should be sown light, should only be covered with Om, 005 to Om, 010 of potting soil. As soon as the young plants have reached sufficient consistency, they are transplanted separately into pots and placed on a warm bed, the pots buried up to the edges, the plants covered with cloches. Around May, the plants can be de-potted and placed in the ground at the foot of a wall. They bear fruit in September. If you prefer to grow eggplants on a bed without transplanting them into the ground, you can grow them as follows: As soon as the young plant has four to six leaves, it is transplanted in a nursery onto another bed; about a fortnight later, it is transplanted again onto another bed, giving the plants Om, 60 apart. Air is given when the temperature is mild, and the frames are removed around May 15, by which time the plants can do without them. Subsequent care of eggplants consists in removing shoots from the base of the plants, removing leaves that are drying out and watering. Let the plant grow up a single stem, cutting off the lateral shoots. In this way, the fruit acquires greater volume and is of better quality. Eggplant is an annual plant native to Africa. It is the solanum melongena of Linnaeus, to which we have given the trivial names mérangène, mayenne, eggplant, mélongène. Several varieties are known, the most widely cultivated of which is the long-fruited purple eggplant. Its stems are 0",60 to 0m,90 high, thick, purplish; its leaves are petiolate, hairy, long from Om,15 to Om, 25 and wide from Om, 08 to Om, 10. Its fruit, quite large, is oblong, dirty purple in color; its flesh is white. It has one variety with round, red fruit; another with round, yellowish fruit; yet another with long, yellow fruit. The last three varieties differ in habit and fruit size, and are less widely cultivated. Eggplant fruit is quite delicate and pleasant-tasting, and can be fried, grilled or stewed. These plants, whose fruit is edible, should not be confused with another eggplant grown as an ornamental. It's known as the egg-laying hen or egg plant (solanum melongena ovifera). Its shiny white fruit is absolutely egg-like and poisonous. CUCUMBERS. Cucumbers are sown from December to the beginning of March. They are grown in the same way as melons. The seeds are sown singly in small pots, sunk to the rim in the bed. When the young plant has two leaves, in addition to the seminal leaves or cotyledons, it is transplanted to another warm layer, leaving all the soil in the pot as a clod. Cucumbers are fairly slow to bear fruit; although they are treated on warm beds, they take no less than two months to produce their first crop, which is harvested two weeks after the fruit has set. In order to have them successively from spring to autumn, they need to be sown several times. Chassis plants require a moderate temperature, which can vary from 14° to 25° R. They need to be slowly acclimatized to the air, which they will never be denied when the weather is mild or hot; then, as with other forced plants, open the chassis gradually, according to the degree of heat of the outside temperature. In March, April and May, it is also necessary to break the sun's rays, by means of leafy branches or other shelters, which do not totally prevent daylight from reaching the plants. In fact, this type of care is used in most forced cultivation. If, in winter, the temperature in the beds falls below 10°, we must hurry to set up heaters for this purpose next to the bed. Cucumbers should be spaced Om, 50 to Om, 60 apart, and when the stem is about Om, 15 to 0m, 20 long, it should be bent back by cutting it with a knife above the second leaf; this is called pruning. The bent stem will grow two branches: these must be cut back to their second leaf. As soon as more branches sprout, and their fruit is knotted, pinch them at two eyes above the fruit. Sterile branches, or those that could cause confusion in the future, should also be pruned. It's up to the horticulturist to direct and space the sprays of this plant appropriately on the bed: this is very easy if the gardener does it in time and before the branches have become an inextricable network. Watering should always be done with lukewarm or sun-warmed water, or even better, with water drawn from a reservoir inside the greenhouse. STRAWBERRIES. The excellent strawberry fruit is one of the most pleasant and healthiest products in the vegetable kingdom. Refreshing, sweet, fragrant - these are the qualities of this generally esteemed fruit. As a result, horticultural merchants and amateurs are always well compensated for their efforts when they cultivate this plant properly. In the open air, the first strawberries are usually harvested in June, and the last in October. The gardener's aim should therefore be to grow strawberries during this period, i.e. from November to May. Forced cultivation provides us with this means in several ways: In March, we lay out beds 1.33 m wide, leaving paths of Om.60 between them. Each bed will contain four rows of strawberry plants, spaced Om.30 apart in a checkerboard pattern, if we use those known as Alpine or Four Seasons. If some of these strawberry plants bloom in spring or summer, the flowering stems should be removed; the runners should be carefully removed as they are born. The rest of the summer care consists of mulching with short manure, weeding, hoeing and watering. As soon as the cold weather arrives, we place the trunks, whose ordinary size is such that they enclose the planks right up to the edges of the paths. These paths are then filled with warm manure, which is well compacted and raised to the height of the frames placed on the boxes. Every evening, the mats are unrolled over the frames, and removed in the morning; air is also provided if the temperature is mild. The gardener's particular attention should be paid to destroying the snails which, throughout the winter under the frames, do immense damage to the strawberry plants, gnawing away at the most tender parts, and in particular the buds of new flowers. One person holds the frame open, while another, light in hand, hunts them down with tweezers. Another way of forcing strawberry plants is to put them in pots well in advance. In spring, in pots Om.16 to Om.20 deep, with the same diameter at the top and inner walls, plant seedlings from the previous year's nets in good, loose, terra-cotta soil. These pots will be exposed to the rising sun, so that the plants receive the sun's beneficial rays from morning until eleven o'clock throughout the summer. The pots should be buried up to their edges in the soil of the bed or flowerbed. The space left between them should be such that, once they have reached full growth, the plants do not touch each other. Great care should be taken with watering, especially during droughts when the roots cannot draw any moisture from the soil other than that in the pots. Flowers and netting are removed during the summer. From November onwards, these potted plants are placed under glass frames, without a layer of manure, just to protect them from frost damage. In December, January or February, depending on when they are to be forced, they are placed in the greenhouse or under canvas, where the heat is raised to 10° up to and during flowering, and to 15° during fruit formation. The time that elapses from the moment the strawberry plants are brought into the greenhouse until the first fruits are harvested is about 60 to 70 days. If you want an uninterrupted succession of fruits, you need to replenish the greenhouse every twenty days, until March 15th, with pots that are ready under the frame. Cultivation is rarely successful when begun before January, but it is always successful when begun in February and March, and fruit is more tasty and abundant the closer it is to spring. This is mainly because there is often no sun in winter, and strawberries, like pineapples and so many other fruits, want to be invigorated by its rays. A few pots of strawberry plants can be placed in the pineapple greenhouse; but, as the temperature of the greenhouse intended for these plants is usually quite high, it follows that the strawberry plants vegetate too quickly and give only an unsatisfactory product. Strawberry plants can be brought in when their fruit is half-ripe, where they finish ripening. Forced strawberry plants require frequent watering around the root collar; watering over the flowers aborts some of them and significantly reduces the harvest. Potted plants thrive best when the surface of the soil is covered with earth. To do this, remove the Om, 03 deep layer and replace it with consumed cow dung. The strawberry plant is very fond of loam and substantial soil; it is an enemy of fresh manure, languishing in it, and its leaves turn yellow. If heat can be supplied by means of a thermosiphon in the greenhouse, cultivation is considerably facilitated and accelerated. For large strawberries, we recommend Keen's seedling and rose-berry for forced cultivation. In fact, we have yet to discover an excellent large-fruited variety that is also suitable for forced cultivation. We still recommend Myatt's surprise and Swainston's seedling for this purpose. MELON. The melon (cucumis melo, Linn.), a member of the gourd or cucurbit family, is native to Armenia; consequently, in northern climates, it can only be grown under cloche or chassis, in a tarpaulin or greenhouse, if ripe fruit is to be obtained before mid- or late summer. If it is possible to grow it outdoors, as we'll explain later, the plant requires some preliminary care that plants grown outdoors in our climate can do without. This is not to say 14 that cultivation is difficult, it's far from it; on the contrary, we consider it very easy. For early melons, or those due to ripen before summer, a bed is prepared in January under a frame. When the temperature of the potting soil covering the manure has dropped to -25 or 30° centigrade, the seed is sown in potting soil mixed with one-sixth sand and covered with Om,010 to 0m,015 of the same potting soil. After five to six days, the seed sprouts. Seedlings can be sown in small pots, which are buried up to their edges in the soil; one seed is placed in each pot. The frames are then placed and covered with mulch or litter. After the seed has sprouted, when the sun is shining brightly and the outside temperature is above zero, air should be supplied from 11 a.m. to 2 a.m., by lifting the panels from behind from Om, 03 to 0m, 06. At the same time, the doormats must be removed, an operation that should never be neglected, even when the temperature is 5° or 6° Réaumur, provided the sun is shining on the frames. Heat must be maintained by means of stoves, which must be changed from time to time. If, despite the stoves, the heat of the bed were to fall below -10° centigrade, a new bed would have to be made on which to transport the pots. Layers made of stable manure, mixed with leaves or tannin, retain heat for a very long time, and can sometimes be sufficient until it's time to put the plant up permanently. By growing the plant in pots until it's ready for transplanting, it's easier to put it in place, and the rootball stays intact if you know how to remove it with a little dexterity. These pots for CULTURE MARAICHERE. 2. 22) melon pots are from Om,07 to 0m,10 in diameter; they are arranged side by side to avoid wasting space in the bed. We would point out that the plants must not be kept in these small pots for too long, as they will then become stunted, and their roots, which completely cover the walls of the pots, cannot all be preserved. As soon as the first leaves appear above the cotyledons, you need to check whether the plant has sufficient roots. This is done by placing the left hand on the pot, passing the plant by its base between the middle and ring fingers; at the same time, with the right hand, the pot is tilted so that the clod of earth rests entirely on the left hand, while the empty pot is in the right hand. If the lump of earth is difficult to remove, we give it a few jolts by lightly tapping the rim of the pot on the wood of the chest. These little operations are familiar to all gardeners, so we'll only mention them for the inexperienced. As soon as the melons have two leaves, not including the cotyledons, the head Om, 006 to Om, 007 is cut off above these second leaves, and a little dust is put on the wound of the young stem, which then heals more quickly. After this initial pruning, two branches will soon grow from the leaf axils, spreading away from each other. These, in turn, should be stopped when they have developed sufficiently to be cut off above their fourth leaf. Each leaf gives rise to a new stem, eight for the two initial branches. These eight branches are cut off above their third leaf. All these branches are distributed evenly, so that they form rays that diverge from the base of the plant. Female flowers soon appear on these third branches, distinguished by the development of their ovary, which forms the nascent fruit. Pruning is then carried out for the fourth time, with the aim of better knotting the fruit, which would not benefit from the sap that would be carried uselessly in the superfluous branches or leaves; at least, this is the generally accepted opinion. As soon as the fruit is about the size of a hen's egg, all the runts or malformed fruits are removed from the same plant, leaving a few of the larger ones, which are then cut off as soon as it is seen that two fruits are continuing to develop on two different branches. Only two fruits are left on each plant; some gardeners even keep just one. At the second pruning, the soil should be covered with a light layer of litter; if you wait any longer, the multiple branches will interfere with this operation, which is carried out to prevent the plants and their fruit from resting on the soil, whose humidity can sometimes lead to cankers or rot. Young fruit should be protected from the hot summer sun, either by covering the frames with tree branches or straw mats, or by covering the fruit itself, by tilting a surrounding leaf over it without breaking it. It's essential to use water sparingly, and never water the flowers while the fruit is setting; wetting them can cause many to abort. If necessary, water around the base of the melon. Once the fruit has set, it is no longer harmful to give the whole plant a light wetting from time to time, either with water that has been kept in a greenhouse, or with rainwater that has recently fallen while the temperature is mild; but cold well water should never be used. You can tell when a melon has reached the right stage of ripeness when there is a slight tear at the stem, indicating that the fruit is about to detach itself, when the flesh gives way a little at this point under the pressure of your finger, when it changes color and becomes fragrant. Instead of taking care of melon seedlings in pots until they are in place, you can sow them in the same layer from the start, transplant them in due course to a new layer by removing them in clods, and treat them otherwise as described above. Under each panel, plant only two melon plants at Om, 25 one from the other, regardless of how they were previously treated. As we have said, first-season melons are sown in January, second-season melons in February, and third-season melons in March. For all these periods, cultivation does not vary much; however, melons sown in March or late February can be grown under cloches on muted or less warm beds. Melons sown in January ripen, if properly managed, in May; those sown in mid-February can produce ripe fruit towards the end of June. We'd now like to talk about growing melons in the ground, and this is not the least interesting. In good soil and with a good exposure, they fruit constantly when the year is favorable, i.e. if the summer is hot and dry. On the contrary, the year is unfavorable if the summer is cold and rainy. It follows from this that cultivation in the open ground is somewhat fortunate, but also that fruit grown in the open ground is tastier, and cultivation is much less costly. In March or April, open a trench Om,35 deep and Om,60 to Om,80 wide, and fill it to Om,35 above the outside soil with well-packed horse manure or other manure likely to heat up; cover this manure to Om 25 with good garden soil containing plenty of decomposing fertilizer. Seeds or young plants are planted 2m,00 apart and immediately covered with cloches. Pruning is the same. To grow melons in their simplest form, square or round holes of Om,50 in diameter, Om,25 deep and 2m,00 apart are opened. These holes are filled with half-consumed manure, Om, 25 high above ground level. The soil used to cover these well-packed manure cones should be good garden soil mixed with potting soil. As soon as pruning is complete and the branches are touching the sides of the bells, remove the bells and place them back on three pieces of wood, so that the melons can enjoy the air without the rain reaching them. Melons are often attacked by the grise, a microscopic insect that lodges itself by the billions on the 22. surface of the leaves, giving them a floury, powdery hue. This insect does not attack healthy melons; everything leads us to believe that it only attacks melons that have been left to languish from thirst, and which have been kept under closed frames due to excessive heat, while the sun is scorching. The parenchyma and epidermis of the leaves undergo an alteration, after which the insect appears to emerge. This insect can be destroyed by spraying with water in which a small quantity of potassium sub-carbonate is dissolved, or by burning soot under the frames. Melons vary constantly from seed to seed, so you can never be sure of reproducing a variety identical to the one from which the seed was taken. Melon brodé or maraicher is the best and only melon that lends itself well to cultivation in the open ground: it has the following varieties: melon maraicher, round; melon langeais, oval; melon brodé à chair verte, very-brodé; melon sucrin à chair blanche, oval, small, melting; melon d'Honfleur, large; melon de Coulommiers, large, green fruit. Among the best varieties grown indoors, we'd like to mention first and foremost the white-fleshed Prescott melon. Next come: cantaloupe melon, sometimes warty; early fine cantaloupe melon, depressed, small; orange cantaloupe melon, very early; large black Dutch cantaloupe melon, oval, very large; large Portuguese cantaloupe melon, with high, scabby ribs; South Carolina melon, a deserving variety; small, embroidered, oval fruit, no ribs; very sweet, spicy flesh; very thin rind. Among the melons with smooth rind, which keep longer in the fruit store than the others and are known as water melons, winter melons, the following deserve the grower's attention: Maltese melon, white flesh, elongated fruit; Morée melon, elongated fruit; Maltese melon with red flesh; Peruvian melon; Odessa melon. These melons are called water melons because their flesh is very watery, very melting and more or less sweet. Outwardly, they are distinguished by their smooth rind, whipped light and dark green; their red or greenish-white flesh, odorless fruit. No watermelon is as good as the cantaloupe or the brodé melon; but their long shelf-life until the end of February, in the fruit store, is certainly worth something; then we must take into consideration that this fruit is one of the healthiest and much less indigestible than other melons. CHILI. Pepper (capsicum annuum, Linn.) is a plant of the solanaceae family, native to South America. It is known as pepper, pimentcorail, Guinea pepper, long pepper and Spanish pepper. There are several varieties, differing in the shape of the fruit and the degree of pepperiness. In India, it is widely used as a seasoning that stimulates the appetite in the same way as mustard and other spices, which act on the salivary glands. Orientals cut the fruit into small pieces and eat it with every mouthful of meat. In Belgium, chillies are also cultivated for their fruits, which are usually preserved in vinegar like gherkins. The milder fruits of some varieties are eaten raw in salads: the sweet chili pepper, the chile pepper, the yellow pimenttomate with small, rounded, yellow, sweet fruits; the large, sweet purple chili pepper, with long, paunchy, purple fruit. Sow in February or March on warm soil, under a frame. As soon as the plant is strong enough, it is removed as a clod and planted on another layer; or in May, it is planted in rows along a warm wall. Fruit ripens during the summer. Dietsed G CULTIVATION OF SEASONING PLANTS. ABSINTHE. Wormwood can be propagated from seed or broken plants. This plant thrives in all types of soil and exposure. It is not mentioned here either as a seasoning or as a vegetable, but since time immemorial it has been given a small corner in humble country gardens, and rightly so. Wormwood has well-characterized medicinal virtues; its use is not dangerous. Shepherds and farmers know how to use it on many occasions. In some provinces of Belgium, absinthe is also used according to a traditional religious custom: it is blessed with a few other aromatic plants such as tansy, chamomile, etc. These plants are kept in the hearth of the fireplace, where they are used to make the most of the sun's rays. These plants are kept in the domestic hearth, and when a storm breaks out, a portion of these aromatics is burned, and the smoke of this poor man's incense rises to ward off the storm! These simple customs, which only impiety would dare call superstitions, are all too often lost! - Do they not come from our fathers, whom we respect in them? In recent times, wormwood has been recommended as a sure way of driving fleas or flea beetles away from cauliflowers and other plants of the crucifer family. For this purpose, boil or digest a few pounds of this herb in water; decant the liquid carefully and sprinkle over the plants. Aphids flee and cannot tolerate the bitterness of the plant. Petite wormwood (artemisia pontica, Linn.) can be grown in the same way and is used as a seasoning for pigeons. GARLIC. Garlic grows well in all types of soil, but prefers light, sandy, substantial and warm. It does not usually reproduce from seed, even in countries where it is widely cultivated, such as southern France, Italy and Spain, and where it is an indispensable part of people's diet. It is propagated in cloves, which must not be planted upside down. In Belgium's climate, these onions are planted at the end of March or beginning of April, in beds or borders at a distance of Om, 12 to Om, 15 and at a depth of Om, 03 or Om, 04. When the leaves are dry, which takes place in July and August, the onions are lifted and left for a dozen days on the ground, in the air and sun; then they are made into bundles and hung in a dry place. In Belgium, where garlic cultivation is not as important, it is used only as a seasoning, and always in small quantities2 . There are, however, dishes where its presence is pleasing and, in a way, indispensable. Garlic bulbs are composed of juxtaposed scales, called cloves; they are wrapped in a common membrane or pellicle, from which they must be removed only when they are to be used. ANETH. Dill (anethum graveolens, Linn.) is an annual plant of the Umbelliferae family. In most horticultural literature, it is confused with fennel, which belongs to the same family and genus, but is a different species. The two plants are essentially different. The plant we are concerned with here has lower stems than fennel. In dill, they are only Om, 50 to 1m, 00; then the leaves are shorter, as are the leaflets; the seeds are compressed, concave on one side, convex on the other. They have an aromatic scent of their own, and are used to season pickled onions. Dill is sown in April by dropping a few seeds among the onions or at the edge of flowerbeds. A few plants are more than enough for a household. The seeds retain their aroma for many years. ANISE. Anise is sown in spring, in beds or borders, in light soil kept moist until the seed has emerged. Thinning the plant when it is strong, weeding it and watering it in dry spells are the only care it requires. The stems are cut in August and exposed to the sun for a few days. The dry seeds are beaten and stored in a dry place. The seeds are used. Anise (pimpinella anisum, Linn.) is native to the Levant. The plant is an annual. ARMOISE. Sagebrush (artemisia abrotanum, Linn.), a member of the Compositae family, is a shrub from Om, 60 to Om, 90 in height; its leaves are petiolate, with setaceous divisions, and give off a lemon and camphor scent. A warm exposure and light, substantial soil are all it needs. In spring, it can be propagated by bursting the stems. This plant, native to southern Europe, is scarcely used in Belgium as a condiment or seasoning: it is cultivated rather for its aromatic scent. BASIL. Common basil (ocymum basilicum, Linn.), a member of the Labiatae family, is native to India. This small aromatic plant is sown in March on a bed and planted in May, Om, 25 apart, in a shady spot on soil mixed with compost. This species has the following varieties: green, fine green, violet, fine violet, lettuce-leaf and nettle-leaf. 11 Basil seeds are very fine, so when sowing them, they must be covered with very little soil. Also, when transplanting, care must be taken to lift the young plants into clods. To obtain mature seeds in our climate, we recommend potting a few plants that can be brought into the greenhouse in autumn. These little plants like to be watered frequently. To preserve dry basil, as it is used in many foods, we pull it out before flowering, dry it on a shaded floor, then put it in boxes or jars. Seeds keep for three years. BORAGE. Borage (borrago officinalis, Linn.) is a plant native to Belgium, giving its name to the borraginae family. It is sometimes found on the high edges of meadows. Its blue, pink or white flowers make a beautiful ornament to salads. It is for this purpose that some amateurs cultivate it in the garden. The plant is sown in October or spring; the seed should be spread very lightly and without covering it. It sprouts spontaneously. However, if you wish to harvest the seeds, it would be wise to remove the plants as soon as they begin to yellow and fade: later, the seeds have already emerged from their capsules. CAPUCIN. Nasturtium (tropœolum majus, Linn.) is an annual plant in our region, belonging to the geraniaceae family. 2. 23 16 In its native Peru, it is a perennial. Both large and small nasturtiums are grown in gardens. The flowers of both are pretty, serve as salad supplies and make a very pleasant seasoning. The flower buds and half-developed or pea-sized seeds are good for pickling in vinegar. - They are sown in April, either in the open ground, with good exposure against a wall or tree for support, or in small pots to place the young plants in the open ground, where you see fit. The flowers represent a sort of helmet and the leaves a shield; they have been thought to represent a kind of trophy: hence the name tropæolum, from a Greek word meaning trophy. CHENILLETTE. A small plant of the legume family, of little use; at most, it can only satisfy lovers of the unusual, who like to put it in salads to surprise people who don't know the fruit of this plant. Its French name, chenille, and its Latinized Greek name, meaning scorpion's tail, indicate the similarities that have been seen in the pods of the plants that make up this genus. The seeds of this species, like those of the others, should be sown in April, in substantial soil with a southern exposure. They soon sprout a stem that spreads to a maximum of Om,30; it is lined with oblong leaves, from whose axils small yellow butterfly-like flowers are born in July: these are followed by bristly, hair-covered pods resembling rolled caterpillars. The chenillette, vermiculated caterpillar (scorpiurus vermiculata, Linn.), inhabits the southern provinces of France. CIBOULE. Chives (allium fissile) are sown in March in substantial, light soil, so that the young plants can be transplanted in May, two by two, at a distance of Om, 15 in all directions. The bulbs soon grow and multiply, forming an assembly of small, elongated bulbs that adhere to one another; they are called "tufts of chives". The leaves of this small species of garlic are 0a, 20 to Om, 25 long, spindly, cylindrical and fistulous; they are used, along with the bulbs, as a salad dressing. Garlic is still sown in July, and yields the following spring in April and May. Varieties are known as white, red and early. These small plants are annuals and grow very quickly. If sown in autumn, they should be covered with leaves or litter, depending on how cold it is. Perennial chives can be grown in rows or borders; for all care, clumps should be divided when they become too strong. CHIVEL. The chive (allium schœnoprasum) is smaller than the above; it is perennial and is grown in borders. Its leaves are used as a salad dressing. The plant requires no special care, but Jes tufts should be divided when they have grown too large. Like the common onion, these small plants are particularly fond of poultry droppings. LEMONWOOD. Lemongrass (melissa offic., Linn.), a member of the Labiatae family, is a plant cultivated in our gardens for its pleasant lemon-like scent. It is perennial; its leaves are petiolate, oval and slightly heart-shaped; the flowers are small, white or incarnate in color. It can be propagated from seed or by splitting stumps; the latter is easier. Citronella is native to France and common in the southern departments. Large-flowered lemon balm (melissa grandifl., L.) is worth mentioning; its larger flowers, arranged in one-sided clusters, are purple-pink. We have a variety with variegated leaves. CRESS ALÉNOIS. Watercress is used as a salad dressing, and is considered the best of all plants used for this purpose. With its pronounced, slightly piquant taste, it is a pleasant seasoning for the first salads of spring. It is a powerful aid to digestion and, like 08 watercress, is antiscorbutic and depurative. Sow it from the first days of March and consecutively every eight days, if you want to have it all summer long. The seed lifts very quickly, and the plant is no less quick to set seed, sometimes ten or twelve days after sowing. Cress should therefore be cut very young; once it has set fruit, it can no longer be used. In summer, it needs shade and watering; the more it is watered, the more tender it remains; drought makes it hard and tough. Cultivated passerage (lepidium sativum, Linn.) is an annual plant of the cruciferous family, native to Persia. In addition to the ordinary species, five varieties are known: curly, broad-leaved, golden, Normandy passerage and another curly-leaved variety. PERENNIAL CRESS. Perennial cress (erysinum prœcox, Smith) is a plant that can replace watercress, with the same taste and properties. It is sown in spring, in rays, in a damp spot, on light, open soil. The seeds are small and should be covered with very little soil. SHALLOT. The shallot (allium ascalonicum, Linn.) is a small bulb that encloses four to twelve cloves under a common com23. 14 mum envelope. A variety is grown under the name of grosse échalote, which appears to differ from the former only in the volume of its bulb. Cultivation of this plant is much the same as that of garlic. However, with shallots, one precaution is essential: they must be planted flush with the ground; if buried too deeply, they will rot. Planted in February or March, the bulbs can be used as early as May. ESTRAGON. Tarragon (artemisia dracuneulus, Linn.), a member of the floscose family, is a Siberian perennial. In our gardens, we usually grow a clump of it at the edge of a square, to be used as a seasoning. Its young stems and tender leaves give candied gherkins and salads a pleasant taste that is at once pungent, sweet and aromatic. The plant needs to be cut from time to time during the summer to rejuvenate itself. It multiplies from splinters and requires no care. FENNEL. A perennial plant of the Umbelliferae family, native to Africa. It is found in stony places in some provinces of southern France. It is Linné's anethum fœniculum. It has a variety known as sweet fennel; its seeds are used by confectioners and in veterinary medicine. The root of this plant is 10 straight and tapering; its stems are cylindrical, 1 to 2 meters high, smooth and twiggy; leaves long, three times winged; hairy leaflets, terminal umbels; flowers yellow, small; seeds oblong, flattened on one side, convex and grooved on the other. Fennel seeds are sown in May, in beds or borders, in tilled soil. As soon as the plants are strong enough, plant them in a checkerboard pattern, 0.35 m apart. Water often. They are ridged a first time when they are Om, 15 to 0m, 20 high, and so on up to three or four times as the plant develops. It is used in the same way as celery, to which it is said to be superior. HYSOPE. Hyssop (hyssopus off., Linn.), a sub-shrub from Om,40 to Om,60, of the Labiatae family, is native to France. Its tapering stems have linear-lanceolate leaves, ending in spikes of flowers that vary from white to blue or red. In the market garden, we reserve a small place for it because it is used as a seasoning like thyme. Seeds are sown in March, and it can also be propagated by splinters and cuttings. LAVENDER. Lavender (lavandula spica, Linn.) is a perennial plant of the Labiatae family, with woody, gregarious, quadrangular stems and blue flowers in a terminal, whorled spike. The whole plant gives off a very pleasant, aromatic 16-odour. It multiplies by seed or, more usually, by bursting, in March, April or September. It is planted in clumps or in borders on light, warm soil: it comes to us from the south of France. MARJOLAINE. Marjoram (origanum majoranoïdes, Wild.), a small plant of the Labiatae family, a little woody at the base, has petiolate, obtuse, elliptical, entire, whitish leaves; the spikes are tetragonal, rounded at the top, and the corollas are white. This perennial plant is native to Barbary. Cultivated in France as a condiment, marjoram is an aromatic and fortifying herb used in stews. One or two plants are sufficient in the garden. MINT. One or two clumps of spearmint (mentha crispa, piperita, Linn.), a member of the Labiatae family, are grown in gardens. These and many other species are native, perennial and very hardy. They are easily propagated by separating clumps. ORIGAN. Common oregano (origanum vulgare, Linn.), a member of the Labiatae family, grows on the edges of woods and along hedges. Its aroma is less fine and delicate than that of marjoram, but it has the same uses and requires no care in cultivation. PERCE-PIERRE. Stonewort (crithmum maritimum), a member of the umbelliferous family, is a natural inhabitant of seashores and rocks. This salad plant has almost fallen into disuse. The plant is rarely found in the vegetable garden, but its aromatic flavor and health-giving qualities merit it a square foot of space in the garden. The stone borer absolutely requires sandy soil, or even better, the foot of an old wall, where it establishes its roots and draws nourishment from the calcareous salts. Sow in spring; the plant requires no care; it is perennial and likes sunny exposures. PIMPRENELLE. Burnet (poterium sanguisorba) is a native perennial, frequently used as a salad dressing. Its slightly astringent properties have earned it a place among medicinal plants. For salad supplies, burnet must be kept tender by frequent watering and cut back from time to time. It can be propagated by splitting plants in autumn, or by sowing as soon as the seeds are ripe. It thrives in any soil, and is so easy to grow that it can be cultivated in the most inhospitable soils, where it always provides much sought-after food for woollen animals. ROCAMBOLE. Rocambole (allium scorodoprasum, Linn.), improperly called Spanish garlic, is native to Denmark. It has the characteristic of producing bulbils on its stem, in the axils of its leaves. These bulblets, like the cloves, are used for reproduction. Rocambole is very similar to ordinary garlic; it has the same uses, and is cultivated in the same way. It never bears seed; a few small flowers appear among the saboli, but they abort. ROSEMARY. Rosemary (rosmarinus off., Linn.), a member of the Labiatae family, is an aromatic evergreen shrub 1 to 2 meters tall. It is native to southern France. It is easy to propagate from cuttings in the open ground and in the shade. For all care, the plant needs to be stuffed or sheltered during intense cold. SAVORY. Savory (saturica hortensis, Linn.), a member of the Labiatae family, is a small annual plant that reproduces by itself in gardens once its seeds have ripened. It is used as a seasoning for marsh beans, giving them a slightly peppery, aromatic taste. PERENNIAL SAVORY. Savory virace, mountain savory (saturica montana, Linn.), a member of the Labiatae family, is a plant with hard, woody stems rising to 0.03 m. In spring, it can be propagated from seed or by bursting clumps and planting them in a warm spot, in the corner of a flowerbed or in a border. Its seeds keep well for four years. Like garden savory, it is used to season baked beans and hams. This plant grows spontaneously in barren, mountainous areas of France's southern provinces. SAUGE. Sage (salvia off., Linn.) is a perennial of the Labiatae family. If some plants are favored in the garden for their health-giving qualities, it's sage that claims this right. As a seasoning plant, many people enjoy it with fried or stewed fish, etc. The plant requires no special preparation. The plant requires no care whatsoever on the part of the gardener. Thyme (thymus vulgaris, Linn.), a perennial of the Labiatae family, grows wild in the southern provinces of France and in Spain. Although native to a warmer soil than that of Belgium, this plant is highly resistant to our cold winters. There are several varieties, including narrow-leaved thyme, broad-leaved thyme and variegated thyme. Thyme needs only warm exposure and light soil. In spring, it can be propagated by splintering. Another small aromatic plant, thyme-serpollet, is frequently found on our hillsides, and you could very easily introduce a plant into your garden. Like common thyme, it likes a warm exposure and can be used as a border. Both can be used to season meat and fish sauces. These little plants are tonic, hearty and stomachic. Serpollet varieties include lemon-scented, hairless and white-flowered. LEÉGUMISTE OR MARANCHEE GARDENER'S CALENDAR. The gardener who is observant dominates his colleagues in the direction of cultivation and by the abundance of produce his garden provides. He has many signs on which he bases the timeliness of his work. These signs are drawn from the instincts of animals and the phenomena of plant life. For example, the departure of travelling birds warns him of the approach of winter, which will be all the harsher the more these animals leave in greater numbers. Beetle larvae and ants, which live at varying depths in the soil, are further signs of a more or less severe winter. The gardener can therefore use these and an infinite number of other forecasts, such as the abundance of hawthorn fruit, leaf fall, etc., to direct his work and provide himself in good time with everything he needs to preserve his plants and protect his early and delicate plants from the cold. The same applies to the prognoses that the farmer can draw from the early signs that herald a more or less early season: the return of birds, such as plu2. 24 viers, lapwings, snipe, woodcock, thrushes, and finally the swallows tell him of the cessation of frosts and the return of spring. When the passerines gather in flocks at dawn, calling and twittering, it's a clear sign of good weather. The beautiful song of the blackbird announces the same thing when heard in our woods. The calls of the short-eared owl are a sure sign of cold weather, rain and snow. The late mating of magpies augurs a late spring. In one year, these birds were already mated and nesting in January, followed by a very early and beautiful spring. This year (1850), these birds are not yet mating, and we are on March 24th. Some plants also tell us, even in winter, that fine days are more or less at hand. In December or January, hemerocallis fulva is already showing its first leaves above ground, if winter is not to be very harsh. The blossoming of cuckoo, alder, elborium, spring scilla and snow-pearl galanthus are further signs that spring is on its way. Finally, we advise growers who pride themselves on their horticultural knowledge to pay close attention to all the signs which, taken together, can provide a prognosis of the coming weather. - The ancients have already bequeathed us some of these signs, which are invaluable to us today. Shepherds and shepherds were sometimes very expert in this science. We once knew an old shepherd who was never wrong about the weather for the following day, or even for several consecutive days. When asked for information, he would immediately look around, his head raised, and the oracle would speak. We tried in vain to fathom his secret; simple and honest as he was, he wouldn't hide it from anyone, but he didn't know how to communicate it. All the signs that the horticulturist can come to know, combined with those of the barometer, thermometer and hygrometer, lead him to a kind of certainty that rarely makes him fail in his work. - A whole harvest is at risk if he sows a little before the storm; however, if he consults the barometer, that indispensable instrument for every farmer, he will be safe from such accidents. After all, let's avoid a vicious routine and not be afraid to rely on the lessons of our great masters and our own experience. JANUARY. Work in January includes ploughing, preparing and transporting compost, soil and manure, and trimming hedges. Carrots, celery, cardoons, artichokes, cabbages, etc. are placed in sand in the vegetable greenhouse. Sow marsh beans, early peas and parsnips in warm soil. The sprinkler system is covered with litter or leaves to stimulate vegetation in the passes. Layers are set out under frames and fitted with straw mats; melons, tomatoes, eggplants, lettuces, radishes, supplies and purslane are sown. If you have tarpaulins or greenhouses, you can force all kinds of vegetables into them, such as peas, beans, lettuce of all kinds, asparagus, mushrooms, etc.; all kinds of fruit: strawberries, pineapples, etc. You can also heat third-grade pineapples. We heat third-year pineapples, white and green asparagus. Frames are placed over strawberry plants that are to be forced into the ground. Dutch beans are transplanted on beds and under frames. Reheating is carried out; air is given when the sun is shining, and artichokes in the open ground are uncovered, weather permitting. The gardener uses the rainy or snowy weather to clean seeds and make doormats. FEBRUARY. Red and white cabbages, Savoy cabbages, early potatoes and romaine lettuces are planted. Cabbage, carrots, parsnips, onions, celery, leeks, etc. are planted, and covered when it freezes. Plant small bulbs of garlic, shallots and spring onions. Sow peas, broad beans, onions, spinach, carrots, parsnips, cabbage, asparagus, lettuce, parsley, chervil, celery, radish, watercress and chicory. We transplant beans and peas sown in November and December. New beds are built; worn-out ones are demolished; cantaloupes and market gardeners are sown; those that are sufficiently advanced in vegetation are transplanted onto other beds. Beds on which lettuces, radishes, etc. have been harvested can be ploughed to be sown with other vegetables, or to receive cauliflower, lettuce, etc. seedlings. Beans can be sown on a bed and transplanted to the ground in March, covered with cloches on cold nights. Artichokes are uncovered when the weather is mild. Rhubarb is hoeed; sea cabbage is ridged; York sprouts, sown in early September, are planted. Green romaine sown at the beginning of October is planted on the coast; cauliflower sown in September is counter-planted, and early carrots and leeks are sown among them. Spinach is sown as a starter to early cabbage. - The first melons and cucumbers are sown on beds and in trays; pink radishes are planted with early carrots; celeriac and common celery, red and Savoy cabbage, and eggplant. We continue to heat white asparagus, sow endives and Dutch beans. MARCH. In March, the previous month's sowing and planting continues, either in the ground or on beds. Cabbages, early potatoes, peas, broad beans, etc. are planted in the open ground. Sow onions, carrots, parsnips, turnips, chervil, salsify, scorzonera, turnips, radishes, chicory, chervil, spinach, arrowroot, sorrel, pear, cauliflower. Beet and turnip seedlings are planted. - With few exceptions, all seedlings are sown in the open ground. Peas sown in November are rowed, as the rowing guarantees wind protection and the peas benefit more. We remove covers from plants in the open ground; we clean artichokes; we mulch strawberry plants; we earth up; we crimp and hoe cabbages. Plants in trays are given plenty of air, and watered in the morning. New beds are prepared for melons and cucumbers already transplanted or grown on the first bed. All last month's seedlings continue to be sown. As24. perges are sown, and new plantings are made. Seedlings that could not be planted the previous month are also planted. Tarragon, lavender, lemongrass, hyssop, mint and oregano are multiplied by splinters. Chervil and leaf lettuces are sown as onion interplant. Tomatoes, eggplants and melons are planted on the bed, and pumpkins are sown. The last chicory shoots are etiolated. APRIL. All March sowings are renewed; in addition, white and red cabbage, York sprouts, Savoy cabbage, Brussels sprouts and cauliflower seeds are sown. Peas continue to be planted in uninterrupted succession. It's time to sow cardoons, lentils, chicory, endives, escarole, arrochia, tetragonia, baselle, perry, etc. At the end of the month, beans, pumpkins, giraumonts, tomatoes and peppers are sown in the open ground in good exposure. Artichokes are grilled and planted. During this month, all plants that are to produce later, such as cabbages, cauliflowers, peas, broad beans, carrots and onions, should be crimped and hoeed thoroughly. Plants that require these operations are mulched and earthworked. Melons are trained and pruned; the mushroom bed is cared for. The beds are dismantled and prepared for further cultivation. - It's time to plant nutsedge. Chard, picridie, burnet, watercress and, until July, white quinoa are sown. 16 Squares are planted with Brussels sprouts, cauliflower, Savoy cabbage, cabbage, York sprouts and so on. Spinach is crimped and weeded. Part of the previous month's work continues, with planting of all kinds of cucurbits, melons, gherkins, squash, etc., in the open ground. It's time for the main bean sowing; time to weed, hoe, transplant, water many plants, thin out onions and carrots. Pink and white radishes, pink and violet turnips, which came on beds, are exhausted in this month; the beds have been given another destination. The care of melons, strawberry plants and other early crops in trays continues apace. Strawberry seedlings are being transplanted onto old beds. Pineapples continue to be cared for. Melons and batatas are planted under cloches. Purslane is sown. Doormats need to be brought in as weather permits. SUIN. As at the end of May, planting of cabbage species and varieties continues. We plant leeks and the last melons; we sow the last pea seedlings; we sow more arrowroot, radishes, lettuce supplies, purslane, raiponium, spinach, cauliflower, carrots, broad beans, beans to have their produce in autumn. After the first harvest, artichokes are grommeted and flayed, for a second harvest in autumn. Early potatoes, small carrots and onions are already being harvested. With this harvesting, the caD0 rotte and onion seedlings are thinned out. This is the time to spread manure between the young onions, if this operation has not already been carried out. As we said in the article on the cultivation of this plant, it thrives extraordinarily well. Seed harvesting begins with lamb's lettuce and chervil, and is soon followed by several other plants. The bells are pulled in, and the panels and trunks removed. Watering must be given every evening to the plants that need it; it's one of the great occupations of summer. JULY. Large Savoy cabbages are transplanted. Leek planting continues. We can still sow all the seeds of plants that can be harvested before winter. The last cauliflowers are planted, whose apples can be used before or during the winter. A host of seeds are harvested: spinach, raab, lettuce, cabbage, carrots, beans and peas. Celery, crenellated oxalis and olluco are harvested. In this month, early melons produce their excellent fruit; they are soon followed by second-harvest melons, which are usually the first to be cultivated by amateurs. If they are later, their quality is almost always superior. Scorers are sown to harvest their roots the following year. At this time of year, strawberry plants require abundant watering. Transplanted strawberry seedlings are planted in May. 28 Celery is ridged; cardoons and endives are tied and stuffed to blanch them. Strawberry plants are planted in the ground. Strawberry beds are well cared for, either in pots or in the ground, to force them into winter. Pick seeds from chives, radishes, turnips, celery, parsley, carrots, beet, onions, leeks, chervil, lettuces, etc. Artichoke heads are tilted to harvest the seeds and protect them from humidity. Watering continues, as do weeding, hoeing and ridging. Early potatoes are removed and put in a dry place for next year's planting. Start sowing cauliflower, spinach, chervil, etc. Manure is prepared for the first mushroom wheels. Spinach and lamb's lettuce are sown for autumn, and gotte lettuce is transplanted on a worn layer; - at the beginning of the month, white onions are sown for autumn transplanting, and towards the end for spring transplanting. Rhubarb is also sown. SEPTEMBER. In this month, spinach, cabbage, cauliflower and York sprouts continue to be sown; leeks are planted. Marsh beans and crambe seeds are harvested. We plough up layers that have ceased to yield to sow cauliflower or to plant. The time has come to make mushroom wheels; in this season more than any other, their success is assured. We are busy with pineapples; we are multiplying watercress; we are sowing carrots, peas and beans 18 from Holland to bouquet, lettuces to be cultivated under chassis to have the products in winter. The last melons ripen; cucumbers, giraumonts, pastissons, pumpkins, winter melons and other edible cucurbits are harvested to be preserved for varying lengths of time in winter. Eggplants and tomatoes are also harvested. Tomatoes are first sown in trays. - Cabbages and Savoy cabbages are transplanted in nurseries. Asparagus, cardoon, celery, endives, escarole, chicory, arrowroot, salad burnet, pear and beet seeds must also be harvested. OCTOBER. During this month, spinach, radishes, chervil, lamb's lettuce, cauliflower, early peas, etc. are sown in warm conditions. We arrange the greenhouse for the vegetables. Sand is stocked to preserve vegetables; cardoons are stuffed and placed in sand in the cellar as frost approaches. Asparagus stalks are cut and the beds cleaned. Break up all the old layers; pile up all the manure and compost from them to cover the manure in the new layers. We stock up on leaves, and place them near the artichokes to cover them even in the event of light frosts. We transplant little black lettuce to provide the first early salad. We transplant red and white cabbage, Savoy cabbage and cauliflower; we thin out spinach and hoe it. We clean vegetable beds intended for forced cultivation, such as those for strawberries, asparagus, cauliflower, etc. Pineapples and mushroom beds are treated. Yellow nutsedge is harvested in this month. NOVEMBER. Forced cultivation begins, requiring a great deal of attention. Asparagus is grown on hot beds surrounded by stoves. Cauliflowers and lettuces are planted on the same bed; root crops continue to be harvested and placed in sand in the cellar or vegetable greenhouse. Cauliflower, kohlrabi, broccoli, cabbage, Savoy cabbage, salsisis and scorsonera, endives, artichokes, cardoons, beet, potatoes, celery, etc. are brought in. A number of these vegetables and roots are planted in gauges in the open ground. We plant St. Catherine's peas, fertilize asparagus and collect leaves to cover many plants. Brussels sprouts and green cabbages are put in gauges. We also take care of hedge planting, mowing, soil movement and so on. Chicory is arranged to prepare it for shrivelling. Broccoli clods are removed and placed in trenches to be covered with frames or straw mats during the frosts. Artichokes should be buttered, and stuffed if the weather warrants. - Similarly, depending on the degree of cold, cloches and layer frames should be covered. DECEMBER. The work of the previous month continues. Melons are sown on beds and under frames. Early crops such as carrots, radishes, lettuces, beans and peas are also sown. Strawberries are forced; p8 pineapples are tended. Cauliflowers are planted; stoves are set up if the layers lose heat. Increase blankets if the cold becomes more intense. Care is taken to ensure that the blankets around the artichokes are not too light; they are increased as the frosts continue. Finally, we visit the vegetable cellars and greenhouses, and take care of the mushroom beds. During this month, the focus is on arranging composts and working the manure and compost heaps. END. DISIEEdS( - - - -- HI. II. IV. V. Natural crops. - Vegetables proper- - General notions. called vegetables. 14 VIII. - 28 Root vegetables. 146 Vegetable plants with edible fruit... ... . VI. Forced cooking. - Vegetables proprevi. - . . 17 190 205 Root vegetables. 223 Vegetables with edible fruit . 229 IX. Cultivation of seasoning plants. 261 X. Vegetable or market gardener's calendar . . . . . . . . . . . . . 277 TABLE OF CONTENTS A IN ALPHABETICAL ORDER. Shelters . . ... Wormwood . Accot. Ache. . Teens... . . . . . 192 2 . . e . . . . . 261 198 60 . 194 Agaric... . . . . 208 Aû. . Allium . 127, 157, 267, 269 Alternating crops. Ground almonds. Amendments Pineapple. Aneth. Anethum. Aniseed. 262 lAnserine. MARAICULTURE. 2. . 1- . 27 . 173 . . 44 229 263 163, 270 . 263 . 145 25 tEd COC Water . Watering . 1. Artemisia. 2.i-i.;" Artichoke. 2 2 . Asparagus... . Asparagus... . . . Assolements... . Atriplex. - . . . Eggplant... . - 290 60, 132] Chervil . . 264 .1. Jerusalem. Canada. ... . - . . B . - Capuchin beard. ... - . Baselle, - de Loxa... . Ratate or Patale. Binage . Berle... . Beet... Blanchette. Rlete. Plitum. . . . . l. ... . Elector's cap. . of priest. . Borrago. Borage. . Boussingaultia. Brassica. Broccoli. Bromelia. Buttage... ... : 23 264 29 126 ib. 49 26 29 246 264 . . 202 economic. Busilic. Beta. 1. . . . 28 . 38, 205 . Auronne. . . . . . Bâche. n Relic. - . : j- . . . . 4 . . . - . . . . . 7. . .2. Legu84 gardener's calendar 62 50 266 223 23 100 447 51 146 121 52 ib. 180 ib. 265 ib. 50 8 88 241 20 mista or market gardener. . . 277 Campanüla. Capsicum. Gapucine. Cardon. . t. Capdouille.. Credorgsée. Carrot. Cderi. . " . - . 2 . ."" . " " 170 259: i92i, 265 . " 52 173 ib. . 148, 225 . 13 " rave. . . . 57 59 . . . . . 6f Mushroom.. 207 Chassis, . . 199 Chenille vermiculée . 266 Chenillette ib. Chenopodium quinoa . 143 Cherophyllum. ... . 62 Chervi, chervis. . . 152 Chicory. ... ... . Chirouis. . . . . . Cabbage. ... ... . Broccoli, white cabbage, red cabbage, Brussels sprouts ... . " I" " " I" " " n " n " " " Milan or Savoy. York. . ... 63 159 6 83 7 73 75 74 flower. . . 82, 214 de Laponie. . . Lesoinne. . . marine. . . turnip, turneps. . Pak-choï . Pe-tsai. . turnip. . rosette. rutabaga spruit . green. Ciboule. Chives. Cichorium endivia. Cignẽ. Pumpkin. intybus. Lemongrass. Cive, elver. Claytonia, claytonie. Bells. Cochlearia Columbine. Cucumber Conium Convolvulus batatas, Coral. Conical basket Gherkins. Cotiere. Layers - - . . . . . . . . N° Squash... . Marrow. . . cabbage. F4 ..". 95 81 94 ib. 80 78 82 75 267 ib. 66 62 17. 268 267 98 195 169 13 182, 247 . . Color of the earth; its influence. flower. 81 7 . 10f - I. 62 20 223 259 86 189 195 196 191 179 .180 E 100gle Conteau à couper l'asperge. 48 Cram des Anglais. . . 169 Crambé... ... ... .. 95 Cran de Bretagne . . . 169 Cranson, - rustic . . Crémaillère. . . . Cresson alénois... . .1 ib. 200 . 268 99 perennial. . . . 269 crithmum... . Cucumis. 1. 273 . . . .. . . 252 Cucurhita. Cynara. . Cyperus. . . . . . 178 37 . . . . . 173 I Daucus carota. . . . 151 Dent-de-lion. . Market garden division. Doucette... ... . E . Shallot... ... ... Endive... ... . Animal fertilizer. Jauffert:... plants... Entre-planter... . Spinach... ... Yellow thorn... ... Tarragon...... 1. market garden exhibition... ... ..... Fennel......... Broad beans... . Strawberry... ... . Shepherd's manure. n " " stable. stable. . Flemish. . 1. . . 121 269 21 14 26 103 172 270 7 2 270 105 183, 248 72 . . " pig. . . . G. 100 iof, 216 1. . Establishment of market garden . 8 Mud. . . . . . . . 12 8 13 8 Giraumont... . . . . 180 Giroles. . . . . . . Guano... . . . . . 152 H Beans. . . . . 108, 216 oars, dwarf. . 114 Helianthus. 1. . . 176 Lemon grass . 268 Hyssop, Hyssopus . 271 Yam... ... ... . 221 Labours . L . Lettuce... . 117, 218 Lavender . . . . 271 Lepidium... ... . 269 M Lamb's lettuce... ... . 121 Cusco corn . Marjoram. . Mayenne. Mayna. - . - . . E . . . Mceredik, meredic. ... Melissa, melissa. Melon. 1. . 3 . . . 122 t24 N72 947 225 169 268 252 Watermelon. ... . 180 Melongene . Mentha, mint. ... . Merangene . 247 272 247 Vegetable marrow. . . 100 Nasturtium mustard . . . . 169 Turnip. 1 . . . 153 Terrestrial leveling . Animal black... ... 10 Animalized. 9 OEthusa... ... . 62 Onion. ... ... . 125 Olluco. . 153 Oreille de lièvre. ... . 121 Oregano, origanum. ... . Sorrel... ... ... . 130 Oxalis, - crenellated. - of Deppe. 279 . 137 13! Oxalis crenata, - Deppii. . ib. Parsnip. Passerage. . Watermelon. Pastenaca. Pastisson. Potato. " . F. . . c . l. . . . . . Perce-pierre... . Parsley . Pe-isai . Phaseolus . Physalis . Phytolacca. Picridie. Pepper. ... . . . . . . . Pimpinella. . . . Pimprenelle. ... . Dandelion. ... . Pisum... . Egg plant. ... Leek or porreau. Leek or porreau. Pea. - - . " . - 292 - . - . . . . . : . . . . . . . . . . . - . . . . . . . . 1 . Spain. 193 159 268 180 159 186 225 273 131 94 114 135 134 259 264 275 160 140 247 179 135 137, 220 Poivre, - de Guinée,-long." 21 . 135 . . .. . . . . - 259 16. Potato, - . 160, 227 "n d'amour. ... . Poterium. . . . . . Pumpkin... . " . Laying hen... . . ". . 189 273 177 247 121 Purslane... ... . 142, 222 Liquid manure. ..... Quinoa... ... Radish. R . 13 . 143 167 Horseradish, - wild. 168, 169 Rapunzel. Raphanus... . 170 .168 Rave. Rechauds. Repiquage. Rheum, - rhubarb. . Rocambole . Rosemary, rosmarinus. "168 198 14 274 ib. Salade de blé, de chanoine. 121 Salsify . Weeding . " . . . . "170 24 Sarrieite. - perennial. 274, 275 Saturica... ... . Sage. i6. . . . . . . ib. Scandix. . . . . 62 Scolyma, scolymus... . 172 Scorpiurus. Scorsonera... . Sowing . Serfouissage. 266 .170 25 Sersifis. - (See Salsify) . 170 Sium . 152 Solanum . 72,75, 81, 121 Souchet . Spinacca. Tanning. . Tarnotes. Potting soil. Terreautage. 173 . . . 108 22 . . . . 1. 174 21 Tetragone, tetragonia. 145 Thyme, thymus. . . . 276 Tomato. 189 Jerusalem artichoke. . . . 175 Tragopogon... . 172 Tropæolum... . 107, 265 Ullueus tuberosus . . . 155 Zca mais. - de Cusco. 12 END OF TABLE SErad Coogle At the time of publication of the present work, we found in the treatise on market gardening written in the Flemish language by Mr. H. Van Hulle, which we are publishing, a work which we feel it would be useful to reproduce. This work is entitled Tableau d'assolement d'un jardin potager, and contains very precise details on the way in which the succession of harvests should be carried out. As can be seen from the table, the land devoted to growing vegetables is divided into four main zones, corresponding to the number of years making up the rotation period. These zones are in turn subdivided into more or less extensive areas, a sort of park where edible plants are arranged according to the species or class to which they belong. In spite of the numerous remarks it contains, the model crop rotation at the end of this volume would perhaps have been only imperfectly understood if a few explanatory details had been neglected. The author seems to us to have fully grasped the disadvantages of too much obscurity in this circumstance; by prefacing his work with preliminary observations, he wished to avoid a gap which would often have had the CULTURE MARAICHÈRE. 2. 26 often distorted his thinking. - With the same aim in mind, we have translated the lines that we felt related to the attached table, and we have inserted them verbatim so as not to destroy the overall concept. Market garden produce generally falls into four distinct categories: 1° Root crops. - Chicory, carrots, radishes, parsnips, scorzonera. 2° Mealy products. - Lentils, peas, broad beans, etc. 3° Stem plants. - All varieties of cabbage, cabbage shoots, cauliflower, etc. 4° Herbs. - Chervil, purslane, sa- lads and other plants not included in any of the preceding classes. When starting a vegetable garden, whatever its nature or exposure, it is divided into four more or less equal parts, depending on the qualities of the soil and whether it is more or less capable of producing one or other of the aforementioned crops. The market gardener's year begins in February or March, except in the case of forced cultivation and a few other exceptions. The most fertile part is set aside for herbs such as chervil, spinach, etc., which, being partly removed in May or June, are followed by other herbs of the same species, such as celery, leeks or endives, which do perfectly well after fertilizing, but even better 99 without fertilizer. All of these are removed, or have already been removed, in winter; then layers of manure are spread on the field as soon as possible, and wheat lettuce can be sown in it, if (as often happens) the season is not too far advanced. The year is thus over; two harvests have been made, and the land is prepared, or begins to prepare itself again, to receive the next year's crops. The second part, immediately after the first in terms of fertility, is ready to receive root crops. The early carrots are removed in June or July, when salad endives, celery, horseradish or purslane are grown, choosing from among these plants those that are more or less exhausting, depending on the amount of manure expected to be available the following year. Carrots, parsnips, chicory and scorzonera, which are sown later, are removed in November; it is then difficult to harvest any more from this field; the best thing to do is to spread layers of manure as soon as possible. The year is thus also over for root crops. The third part receives beans and peas. When the early peas are removed, they are replaced by leeks, purslane, endives or celery; often dwarf beans are planted in the purslane as a third product. After the leek, etc., manure is usually spread. Spinach can also be sown after early peas, producing well into winter. After late peas, plants that can be harvested later in the season can be brought in, or the field can be used to grow strawberries; in the latter case, the soil needs to be heavily fertilized. Princesses and beans are most prized at the end of the year. For abundant harvests, they should be sown after early peas; they are then perfectly successful, and are also much sought-after by consumers at this time of year. However, spinach or small radishes can still be sown, as they are formed before the frosts and can be enjoyed for some time. In all other cases, the soil is heavily fertilized, then wheat salad is sown. In this way, the third zone, like the previous two, completes its laborious career. The fourth area is used for cabbages of all kinds. Red cabbages are sometimes planted before winter. Sprouts and green cabbages are planted in land that had previously been used for other crops, such as spinach and early lettuce. Green cabbages are transplanted too late to leave the field unproductive until planting time. Cauliflowers, although belonging to the fourth section, are planted in the best soils, because they never succeed in poor soil. Moreover, cauliflowers can be planted in the same place all year round, as they follow on from each other without any problems. They can also be planted as a second crop after onions and shallots. After the various cabbage species, it's impossible to sow anything else. We therefore spread manure on this field as soon as possible, and sow rye, which we cut and bury green; but in this case, it's a good idea to scatter the manure between the plants as early as October; cover with soil taken from the furrows or gutters, and sow between red and green cabbages, and sprouts, which are left to grow, until they begin to freeze hard; the year also ends there for the fourth section. These details suffice to explain how the garden will be planted during the first year. What will be grown during the following season, and what crops will follow the plants we have just described? To avoid any confusion, here's how it's done: The vegetable plot is given over to stem plants, which thrive there almost without fertilizing. As most of these vegetable plants are removed early in the season, we can plant certain stem plants, such as red cabbage, even before winter. This year, we reserve the root-plant area for vegetable plants, taking care to ensure that the least difficult vegetable plants follow the most exhausting root plants: for example, leeks after chicory. The space occupied in the first year by floury crops will be occupied in the second by root crops. The vegetables that are sown first, as the rear crop after the mealy crops, are heavily fertilized; in this way, root crops can be obtained the following year without further fertilization. Finally, the fourth part, which was used for stem plants, will be occupied in the second year by mealy products. The same applies to the third and fourth years: by the fifth year, all the products have, so to speak, returned to their original position. In our opinion, this is the easiest, most regular and most rational crop rotation. SItEnd CIOOQ - -- C - -- --- 1- ---- - COogle -- - .=: "t. 2 M14 Goôgle BELEJ Coogle r: i Send requests without postage to the Editor of Bistiornìqur RURALE, under cover of M. le MINISTRE DE L'INTÉRIEUR A BRUXELLEa. BIBLIOTHÈQUE RURALE, IXSTITCEE PAR ARRETÉ ROVAL DU l5 =ETTEMREE 1618. - 604 Works published in French and Flemish. AGRICULTURAL YEARBOOK. One vol. with statistical table. Price: 1 fr. 25 cent. MANUAL DE CULTURE. One vol. with engraved plates. USE OF LIME IN AGRICULTURE. One volm, MANUEL DR ACTABILITE ACRICOLE. One vol. MANUAL OF ARBORICULTURE. 2 vols. with 205 engraved plates. DRAINAGE MANUAL. One vol. with 88 pl. grav. AGRICULTURAL CHEMISTRY MANUAL. One vol. with grav. pl. IRRIGATION MANUAL. One vol. with 100 p. grav. DAIRY COW SELECTION. One vol. with pl. MANUEL DU MARÉCHAL FERRANT. One vol. with grav. plates. HYGIENE MANUAL. One vol. with grav. plates. FORESTRY MANUAL. Un vol. avec pl. grav. 80 20 40 1 fr. 55 1 fr. 10 1 fr. 25 TRAITÉ DES ENGRAIS ET AMERDEMERTS. One col. with engraved plates 60 40 30 75 30 53 TREATY ON AGRICULTURAL INSTRUMENTS. One vol. with pl. gr. 90 DE LA CULTURE DES PLANTES OLÉACINEUSES. One vol. with pl. 35 MANUEL DE MÉDECINE VÉTÉRINAIRE. One v. with pl. (1r° partie). 55 AGRICULTURE AT THE LONDON EXHIBITION, One vol. VINES AND WINES. Un vol. 55 30 MANUEL DE CULTURE MARAICHÈRE 2 vol. avec pl. grav. 1 fr. 90 En vescte chez le mececce éditerer: COURS D'ÉCOROMIE RURALE. 2 vol. gr. in-18, with plates. 4 fr. BIBLIOTHÈQUE INDUSTRIELLE, INSTITUES PAR ARRÊTE ROYAL DU 28 OCTOBR= I84S. Works published in French and Flemish. ALMARACH IDUSTRIEL. One vol. with pl, grav. GÉOMÉTRIE PRATIQUE. One vol. with pl. eng. PRINCIPLES OF PHYSICS. One vol. with pl. grav. TREATISE ON CONSTRUCTION. One vol. with engraved pl. WEAVER'S MANUAL. One vol. with engraved pl. KNOWLEDGE OF METALS. One vol. with engraved pl. HANDBOOK OF APPLIED CHEMISTRY. One vol. OF CARPENTRY. One vol. with pl. grav. KNOWLEDGE OF KINGS. Un vol. avec pl. grav. n " " " " 13 " 5 " " " " I" " * " " " Price: 50 cent. Each beautifully bound volume costs xo cents more. 30" 70 28 25 30 4 45 40 " " " " " " n " 14 DStESdE, CIOOgle SEtEd GOOgle Boekbind 230 DO COPatle Heblo 2 2 - 4 S 1 1 E4 2 tt 11 - - G42 - 6 21 71 322 6 22 R 3 IR22 . 335 7 18 4 E 15 123 4 2 42 3 4 5 ~~ 2 *421* CEE - 3 2 2 2 3 2 BEL 3 E AS 21 24 2 2 4 6 44 1114 4 EI 124 3 4, 41 4 14 411 4 43 r 21 1 744. 64 2 - ann 6