Ysabeau, Alexandre (1793-1873). Author of the text, Le jardin potager: notions pratiques de culture maraîchère! by I Ysabeau,... 1863. 1/ Most of the content available on the Gallica website is digital reproduction of works in the public domain from the BnF collections. Their reuse falls within the scope of the French law n°78753 of July 17, 1978: -The non-commercial reuse of this content or in the context of an academic or scientific publication is free of charge, provided that the legislation in force is respected and in particular that the source of the content is mentioned as follows: "Source gallica.bnf fr / Bibliothèque nationale de France" or "Source gallica.bnf. fr / BnF" -The commercial reuse of this content is subject to a fee and a license. Commercial reuse means the resale of content in the form of an elaborate product or service, or any other reuse of content that directly generates revenue: a publication for sale (with the exception of academic or scientific works), an exhibition, an audiovisual production, a paid service or product, a promotional medium, etc. CLICK HERE TO ACCESS TARIES AND AIA LICENCE 2/ Gallica content is the property of the Bnf in accordance with article L.2112-1 of the general code of public property. 3/ Some content is subject to special re-use rules. These are: reproductions of documents protected by copyright belonging to a third party. Reproductions of documents held in libraries or other partner institutions. These are indicated by the mention Source gallica.BnF.fr /Bibliothèque municipale de... (or other partner). The user is invited to contact these libraries to find out about their conditions of reuse. 4/ Gallica constitutes a database, of which BnF is the producer, protected under articles 1341-1 et seq. of the French Intellectual Property Code. 5/ These conditions of use of Gallica content are governed by French law. In the event of reuse in another country, it is the responsibility of each user to check that his or her project complies with the law of that country. 6/ the user agrees to comply with the present terms of use and with current legislation, in particular with regard to intellectual property. Failure to comply with these provisions may result in a fine as provided for in the law of July 17, 1978. 7/ To obtain a Gallica document in high definition, please contact utilisation. commercialeo bnf. fr. *THE SCIENCE OF THE COUNTRYSIDE. LE JARDIN POTAGER NOTIONS PRATIQUES CULTURE MARAICHÈRE tO ~ de par YSABEAU, Agronome. AIRTE GLASS D PAUL DUFONT Tue de Grenelle-st-Hlonoré, 45. Pari Source gallica.bnf.fr/ Blbllothèque natlonale de France JARDIN TAGER "... Les ouvrages composent la Bibliothèque des Campagnes " sont admis comme livres de lecture courante dans les bibliothèques scolaires... ". (Circular from S. Exc. le Ministre de l'inst. publ., February 23, 1863.) CLICRY. - Impr. de Maurice Loignon et Cie, rue du Bac-d'Asnières, 12. LA SCIENCE DES CAMPAGNES. - Iupl LE JARDIN POTAGER NOTIONS PRATIQUES CULTURE MARAICHÈRE by YSABEAU, Agronomist IRIE CLASS D* PAUL DUrONT Que de Grenelle-St-Honoré, 45. 1 1665 D D ORORVINIS G Of all the divisions of gardening, the one most closely linked to agriulture is MARAICHÈRE CULTURE. Its purpose, like that of agriculture, is to produce foodstuffs in quantities proportionate to consumption needs; it's no exaggeration to say that the abundance and moderate price of market garden produce are important to the well-being of urban populations, almost to the same degree as the low price and abundance of agricultural produce. As its name suggests, market gardening originated in the dry marshes of the Seine valley around Paris. Old Parisian gardening families still preserve the deeds by which King Charles V, known as the Wise, granted the ancestors of today's market gardeners vast tracts of marshland, on condition that they dried them out to grow vegetables, and bring the produce to the carreau des halles de Paris. Outside the capital's supply circle, market gardening is practiced with care and talent in a few parts of France, especially near Amiens (Somme), Pézenas (Hérault), Perpignan (Pyrénées-Orientales) and Cavaillon (Vaucluse). Elsewhere, this type of gardening is nowhere brought to the same perfection, with rare exceptions for certain special crops, such as artichokes, around Laon (Aisne), and asparagus, near Roye and Montdidier (Somme). It is therefore of the utmost importance to popularize the excellent methods of market gardening. Wherever there is a market for its produce - and nowadays, thanks to the railroads, there is virtually no such market - market gardening can be a source of great prosperity for those who practise it with talent; Everywhere else, it provides the farmer with the means to grow healthy, nutritious vegetables in his modest garden, instead of harvesting coarse produce fit only for cattle feed: He thus improves his diet, consolidating his health and that of his family, to the great benefit of society as a whole. Soil selection and preparation. When the market gardener takes over the operations of a predecessor who knows his trade, his job is half done; he finds the soil all prepared, brought to its maximum fertility by long hand: all he has to do is walk along a well-trodden path, continuing the practice of his predecessor. The situation is quite different when he has to create his kitchen garden on soil that has never been used for market gardening; there, everything has to be done, and, according to the saying of Parisian market gardeners, it takes seven years to make a good swamp. The most important thing, therefore, is to choose the land on which you intend to grow your crops as carefully as circumstances will allow. In principle, any good wheat soil, a little light rather than too strong, with an eastern or south-eastern exposure, is suitable for market gardening. The soil should be open, rather low than too high, sheltered, if possible, by a curtain of tall trees on the north and north-west sides. If the subsoil is impermeable, good drainage is essential. In this case, instead of letting the drainage water run off into the open, it is collected in a basin dug at the lowest part of the general slope of the land: this is an irrigation element that costs nothing. In the vicinity of the capital, the nature of the soil, provided it is permeable and sufficiently deep, is regarded as almost irrelevant. The market gardener, by constantly renewing his manuring and fertilizing techniques, by the uninterrupted use of potting soil and all the fertilizing principles that his crops cannot do without, completely changes the nature of the soil: he makes his own terrain, as the saying goes, and by doing so, he knows how to bring to the highest degree of fertility a soil of mediocre quality, provided that it is well exposed, and that there is no shortage of water for watering: this consideration is preponderant. Market gardening in general relies on two elements: water and manure. Before settling in a location where the products of his industry can easily be sold, the market gardener must therefore make sure, by inspecting the wells in the vicinity, that he will not have to draw water from too great a depth, that the water available is of good quality, and that it will not fail him when he needs it. So when, by a stroke of good fortune, he can find a suitable spot to start his operations, crossed by a stream that doesn't dry up in summer, he should be quick to settle there, even if the soil is mediocre or decidedly bad: water and manure, through market gardening, quickly get the better of the most ungrateful soils. Soil preparation begins with a very careful breaking-up, during which the soil is cleared not only of stones, but also of the roots of perennial plants and pieces of rotten wood that may be present. As these debris decompose in the soil, they become covered with underground fungi that attach themselves to the roots of cultivated plants and can cause them irreparable harm. The next step is to make sure that the soil contains sufficient lime; in case of doubt, this should be verified by a chemical analysis carried out by a competent person. The lime is mixed with soil and decomposed turf to form a compost, which is ploughed into the soil with a spade. If the lime and turf compost has been prepared in October or November, it can be buried in December or January. At the same time, straight and transverse paths are laid out on the ground for ease of service; underground watering pipes are also laid under the paths. This part of the preparatory work for creating a market garden is the most expensive; but it's an expense once made, and when it's well done, there's no need to come back to it. For centuries, Parisian market gardeners used a device they called a manivelle to draw the water needed for watering, and which worked with the help of a blind horse. The water drawn by the crank flowed into a basin, from where it was channeled through underground pipes into barrels buried deep in the ground. Only a few years ago, the crank handle was replaced by a horizontal pump, and the barrels, which were rapidly deteriorating, ceased to be used. Roman cement basins, more expensive but more durable than buried barrels, were substituted. The whole system needs to be well established and ready for use before you start growing vegetables on new land. Fertilizers and soil improvers. Once this has been done, it's time to stock up on fertilizers and soil improvers. If you're growing a marsh of just one hectare, you'll need a cart and a horse for the incessant transport of manure, of which you can't use less than 200 cubic meters every year on an area of this size. To start with, he also needs a plentiful supply of potting soil from old, broken layers; he can easily find some to buy from his fellow growers; later on, he will have an abundance of it himself; he only needs to buy it from outside for his first crops. As for fertilizers, the best of all is horse manure, mainly because of the property it possesses of suspending fermentation for an indefinite time when kept dry, and resuming it at the right moment as soon as it is watered. However, the market gardener can also use manure from cattle, sheep and goats, pigs, rabbits, and even city sludge, when this fertilizer is half-decomposed. Every gardener makes the best use of the fertilizers available in his area; in any case, he should undertake nothing until he is certain that he will not run out of these fertilizers at reasonable prices, and in quantities proportionate to the needs of his crop. The need to obtain plenty of manure all year round is, in fact, the main obstacle to the expansion of market gardening in many localities, because the market gardener cannot, like the farmer, devote a portion of the land he cultivates to fodder crops to feed livestock, and produce the fertilizers his crop needs on the spot. Material. The maraf̂cher must spare nothing to provide himself with all the equipment required by his crop, according to its importance. His tools - spades, rakes, hoes - must be of various sizes, all solid, well fitted and easy to handle, so that they can never fail him when needed. The best spade for market gardening is the Flemish spade (figure 1), with a blade that is longer than it is wide, as wide at the bottom as it is at the top, not too heavy, sharp and slightly curved lengthwise. This peach, used since time immemorial by gardeners in northern France, is beginning to be appreciated and adopted in all market gardens; there is no other like it. Iron tine forks, straight or curved, are used for loading and unloading manure, making beds, digging up rooted vegetables, and giving the soil rapid and highly effective surface cultivation, especially in times of prolonged drought. Hoes, of which the market gardener usually uses two models, provide very good service; they only have the disadvantage of being very tiring for the worker, who can only use them by bending over in an awkward position. The square-bladed hoe (figure 2) is the most widely used; the two-toothed flat or bident hoe (figure 3) is advantageous in slightly hard soils that are not totally free of couch grass or other weedy roots. The iron-toothed rake is the market gardener's harrow; he needs rakes of various sizes, some made of wood, with slightly curved cylindrical iron tines, others made entirely of iron, with long pointed tines, close together, to work on compact soils whose surface needs to be precisely loosened and pulverized. One of the most useful uses of the rake in market gardening is to cover broadcast seedlings, mixing the seeds exactly with the soil on the surface of the beds, which, like carrots and onions, need to be very lightly buried. The hoe or serfouette (figure 4), armed on one side with two sturdy tines and on the other with a sharp blade, is the most practical of all gardening tools for hoeing and weeding row crops; this is its special purpose; it is also used to mark out gullies and open holes or pits for certain seeds whose volume requires them to be buried fairly deeply. The watering can, which the market gardener uses so frequently that it never leaves his hands, so to speak, from spring to autumn, must be neither too small, which would unnecessarily multiply the number of trips from the beds to the basin, nor too large, which would make it too heavy to carry: a capacity of 10 to 12 liters is the most suitable. Almost everywhere in France, the cylindrical Belgian watering cans previously used only in the North, and the old Parisian watering cans with their very bulging bellies, have been abandoned. The flat-sided watering can (fiZgure 5), which can be carried without spreading the arms, has rightly been substituted for some twenty years. A small portable pump (figure 6), whose spout can be fitted with a watering can at will, is useful for watering the beds closest to the basin, saving time and effort: the use of this useful instrument saves part of the labor involved in transporting the water to the site to be watered. To understand the importance of this saving, you need to have seen Parisian market gardeners, during the heatwaves, running around with a watering can in each hand, constantly keeping cool, during the longest droughts, naturally scorching soils, where everything would perish, if you stopped watering them for a single moment. Habit alone can make these robust and courageous men endure such hard work; it's a great thing to spare them at least some of it, with the help of the portable pump. Gardening tools are not the most expensive part of the market gardener's equipment; he needs a more or less considerable number of chests covered with glass frames for the beds, which are, so to speak, the soul of his cultivation. He also needs a good assortment of glass cloches and straw mats, either to cover the cloches and frames as needed, or to create temporary shelters by means of stakes planted in a line, from east to west, from which straw mats are suspended to form espaliers facing due south. With all his equipment in working order, the market gardener can begin his operations. Gardening operations. For the market gardener, as for the farmer, the most important operation is ploughing. In the market garden, ploughing is carried out all year round, and at all times; the ordinary depth of this multiplied ploughing is never less than the length of a spade iron (30 to 35 centimetres), when this instrument is used. The worker begins by digging a pit, from which he transports the earth with a wheelbarrow to the ex1. tremity of the plank by which he is to finish his work. This pit is what gardeners call the "gauge"; it's said of a good ploughman: "He spades well; we'd bury him in his gauge. Other, shallower ploughing is done with the square hoe, the bident, or the iron-tined fork. When the soil, which has been well loosened by one or more previous ploughings, is only hardened at the surface by drought, it can be shaped very well with the fork, which produces large clods that are easy to break up and pulverize with the heavy, pointed-tine rake. In such circumstances, this method is as good as ploughing with a spade. If it is necessary to repeat ploughing for each crop in the market garden, it is no less necessary to repeat weeding as long as weeds invade, and hoeing as often as a crust forms on the surface of the cultivated soil. This crust often becomes very hard after only a few days of drought following a heavy rain that has beaten or, as gardeners say, leaded the surface of the soil. If it is not divided by hoeing, it squeezes the root collar of the plants, significantly retarding their growth. As already mentioned, watering is of vital importance in market gardening. Parisian market gardeners have the principle that if a vegetable garden is not watered thoroughly, it would be better if it were not watered at all: so they never say "water", but "wet" the soil, pouring in 10 to 12 litres of water per square metre in the form of rain, and repeating this irrigation three or four times a day. In the North, and in our neighboring departments along the Atlantic and English Channel coasts, the frequency of rainfall means that watering is not as frequent or as extensive; in the South, watering with a watering can would be unbearable: market gardens are watered in the same way as irrigated meadows, by means of gutters through which water is introduced to thoroughly soak the vegetable beds. But we insist that watering too little does more harm to the soil than leaving it dry. Indeed, a small quantity of water poured onto weathered soil evaporates, cooling the surface layer before the cultivated plants have had time to take advantage of it; it would have been better for them to abstain from watering. Vegetables. In order for the vegetable gardener to understand exactly the needs of each type of plant under his care, and the special cultivation they require, he must arrange them in a methodical order, based not on their botanical characteristics, but on the analogy of the useful products he wishes to obtain from them. Considered from this point of view, vegetable plants are presented in the following order, arranged in four natural divisions: 4th section. - Plants with edible seeds; - - - Plants with edible leaves and flowers; Plants with edible fruit; Root vegetables. These plants are subject to special cultivation requirements, which are not very different for those in the same section. FIRST SECTION, Edible seeded vegetables, This section includes all vegetables in the botanical sense of the term. The common feature of these plants is the shape of the pods or siliques which enclose their seeds, and which in botany are called vegetables; for this reason, they all belong to the Leguminosae family. The first section includes beans, peas, broad beans and lentils. Beans. Brought to Europe from the Indies at a time when no precise date can be assigned, the bean has produced a wide variety of species through cultivation: today there are no fewer than 300. All have retained the temperament of the primitive species; all perish as soon as the temperature drops to just half a degree below zero. The bean, of whatever variety, can therefore only be grown in the open air from the moment it stops freezing to the moment it does not yet freeze. As far as cultivation is concerned, beans fall into two distinct divisions: string beans and dwarf beans. Originally, all beans were rowed, i.e. their long, voluble stems needed support, and wrapped themselves around the stems of neighboring plants: hence the need to row them. Some varieties, by flowering early and abundantly at the bottom of the stems, have lost the ability to grow taller: they have become dwarf beans. Among string beans, the first rank belongs to the white Soissons bean, with very large strings; then come the saber bean, which owes its name to the particular shape of its long pods, and the princess bean, the best of the many varieties known as mange-tout, because when the bean has already reached its normal volume, the pods are still tender and very tasty. The first two beans are grown mainly for their dry beans; the third is eaten fresh. Gardeners who grow beans to sell their dry beans are wise to stick to white beans and exclude colored beans, which are particularly suitable for large-scale cultivation; dry white beans always sell better than colored beans. There's a reason for this, well known to buyers: when not all the beans from the annual harvest have been sold during the year, and the old are mixed with the new, the cooking of this vegetable is uneven and difficult. On the contrary, it's very obvious with white beans: those from the previous year have a yellowish tinge that makes them stand out from the new, glossy white beans; there's no mistaking it. This consumer preference for white beans as a dry vegetable should prompt the market gardener to refrain from growing others, when their produce is not to be sold fresh. Beans require light rather than strong soil, and fear both extremes of drought and humidity. In the Paris climate, beans are sown from May 10 to 15, which is the best time to harvest them when they are fully ripe. If you intend to harvest only green beans and beans for fresh shelling, sowing can be continued fortnightly until July. Beans are usually planted in clumps of five or seven, depending on the size of the plants. The soil, ploughed and smoked as for any other garden crop, is furrowed with shallow lines, drawn with the hoe along a chalk line, some along the length of the garden beds, others across; the points where these lines meet mark the place of the bean clumps. The distance is 50 centimetres for large pole beans, and only 40 centimetres for dwarf beans. Open a hole 5 to 6 centimetres deep with a hoe, and throw five or seven beans into each hole, taking care not to let them touch each other. If a good supply of sieved wood ash is available, it's a good idea to throw a handful over the beans before covering them with soil; no soil improver has a more direct effect than wood ash or even peat ash on bean vegetation. When the soil is neither too dry nor too wet, the reams can be planted at the same time as the seed is sown. In lowland areas often swept by strong winds, the stalks are inclined in two rows, one towards the other, and attached two by two 1 decimeter from the top, which gives them great strength. If the soil is too dry, the bean undergoes half-sprouting which, for lack of moisture, cannot be completed; it languishes and never produces vigorous plants; if it is too wet and the temperature is not mild enough, it rots and does not emerge. Bean emergence is often hampered by the crust that forms on the surface of the soil following heavy rainfall after sowing; this crust must be broken up without delay, using the teeth of a very small hoe, otherwise the beans will fail to emerge. The best dwarf beans for market gardening are the hâtif de Hollande and the flageolet de Paris. The former wins for earliness, the latter for fecundity. This latter arrangement is preferable in cool soils, wherever the climate is subject to frequent rainfall: in this case, air currents are established between the rows of beans, encouraging the rapid evaporation of superfluous moisture. In a dry climate, it's better to sow in clumps, as the clumps form a thick shade and retain the soil's freshness better. When the soil is very damp and the climate very wet, both of which are unfavorable conditions for growing beans, you can avoid burying the seedlings and only place them at suitable distances on well raked soil. The soil is then placed on top of the beans in the form of a small eminence, so that they grow much better than if they had been buried. In Belgium, a particular method is used for bean sowing, which can be followed with advantage in all our departments north of the Seine. The soil, suitably ploughed and smoked, is levelled with a rake; then holes or "poquets" are dug at the required distances, according to the type of bean to be sown, in which nothing is sown. A barrel on a wheelbarrow is brought along the path separating the vegetable garden beds, filled with liquid manure or manure juice, mixed with diluted human fertilizer, a mixture known to northern farmers as Flemish fertilizer. Half a liter of this fertilizer is poured into each hole, after which the holes are filled and the soil raked, as if the pots had not been dug. A fortnight later, in the place corresponding to this liquid fertilizer, the beans are placed on the ground without being buried, and a little earth is brought in on top in the form of a mound to cover them. Their roots, meeting in the ground the fertilizer given to them, take full advantage of it, and the beans grow with exceptional vigor. When the beans are well established, they are given a first hoeing, followed by a second a fortnight later; it doesn't take long for them to cover the whole ground, which prevents further weed development. To save time and obtain early green beans in the open air, we sow early dwarf beans on a warm bed, under a frame, which we transplant into the field as soon as the outside temperature allows, and which then receive the same cultivation care as those of the same species sown in the field. Green beans and runner beans should only be harvested with care, either to avoid uprooting the plants, or to avoid dropping the flowers, which adhere poorly to the stalk. String beans grown as a dry vegetable should be harvested three or four times, as part of the pods ripen; without this precaution, a large proportion of the first-ripe beans would spoil in the pods and be lost. Beans destined for sowing the following year are kept in the pods; they are shelled only when ready for sowing. Contrary to the rules that apply to other crops, beans can be sown several years in a row in the same place without any noticeable decrease in yield, either in quantity or quality, and without any appreciable loss of soil fertility. Peas. Peas, which like beans originate in Asia, are slightly less sensitive than beans to the effects of the cold; they can withstand (with the exception of chickpeas, an entirely southern variety) a slight frost of one or two degrees centigrade. Cultivation has given rise to many pea varieties, though fewer than those of the bean. Gardeners distinguish between two series of peas, those with oars and those without oars, or dwarf peas; the latter are particularly prized for their earliness. The best row peas for market gardening are Champigny, Marly, Clamart and Knight's wrinkled peas. None of these peas is very early; all prefer light, sandy soil, smoked the previous year for another crop, to very fertile, recently smoked soil; in these conditions, peas of all kinds grow too much stem and leaf, flower little and give almost no grain. The best dwarf peas are the Michaux de Hollande, the earliest of all, the Prince Albert pea, and the Queen of the Dwarfs English pea, whose stem does not rise more than 25 centimeters. All these peas are precocious and perfectly suited to market gardening, occupying little space and giving way very early to other crops. It's worth noting that it's not in the market gardener's interest to grow peas all the way to maturity, except for those he intends to use for the following year's seedlings. He only cultivates peas for the purpose of harvesting fresh shelled peas, known as green peas; dry peas, which are used in considerable quantities for maritime supplies, are produced not by market gardening, but by large-scale cultivation. Row peas are only sown in spring, around the first half of March. They are sown in rows or bunches, like beans; five or six peas are placed in each hole; clumps are spaced 25 centimetres apart in all directions. When sown in rows, they are spaced 30 or 40 centimetres apart, depending on the presumed development of the plants. A little sifted wood ash sprinkled over the peas at sowing time is just as useful for them as for beans. Eight to ten days after the peas have emerged, they are given a first hoeing, then a second ten or fifteen days later, and the reams are placed. When peas are grown on a large scale, the oars are a fairly expensive item. For medium-sized species, this expense can be avoided by the following procedure. Between each row of peas and at the same distance, sow a row of bog beans, which grow at the same time as the peas, and whose straight, firm stems serve to support the flexible pea stems. This method of cultivation applied to Knight's wrinkled peas and Marly peas, which require very large oars, would give only mediocre results; the stems of the peas, rising much higher than those of the broad beans, would lack support at the top, and would not be very productive. Champigny peas, on the other hand, and all medium-height varieties, produce about as much when supported by rows of broad beans as when they are rowed, because the height of their stems only slightly exceeds those of the broad beans. Rowless peas can be sown at two specific times, at the end of November and the beginning of February. November seedlings can only be sown at the foot of a wall in a south-facing position. In mild winters, the central stem of the pea freezes alone, while the root resists; it returns to vegetation very early, and produces lateral stems which flower and bear fruit very early; but if the winter is a little severe, everything freezes. The same is often true of peas of the same dwarf, early varieties, sown in the first days of February. If they don't have a hard frost later on, they flower and bear fruit at almost the same time as peas sown in November that have withstood the winter. If they freeze, we hasten to replace them with seedlings sown in the same place in the first fortnight of March. When early dwarf peas are in full flower, cut off the tops of the stems, whose flowers are for the most part sterile; this removal hastens grain formation in the pods at the bottom of the stems. No matter how it is cultivated, early dwarf peas are never very productive; but when they are successful, the green peas they produce very early are sold at advantageous prices, and the land, quickly cleared, can be used for another crop; this is almost the equivalent of a catch crop. The chickpea, completely different from all other peas, is dwarfed and not very productive, except in the most southerly of our départements; its stem and leaves resemble those of the lentil. Chickpeas are sown in spring, in the same conditions as early dwarf peas; they flower little and are never very heavy. Its grain is rarely intended for consumption as a fresh vegetable; it is harvested as a dry vegetable, consumed princĩpally as a puree, with a very pronounced flavor, pleasant only for those accustomed to it. Broad beans. The broad bean, native to Egypt, is sensitive to cold to about the same degree as the poïs; we have several varieties, some with high stems, others quite dwarfed. High-stemmed beans are rarely grown in market gardens; they are grown mainly in open fields for maritim supplies. In vegetable gardens, they are mainly grown in large garden varieties, such as the N iarais bean and the Windsor bean, an English variety whose beans remain green when fully ripe. Among the dwarf varieties, the Julienne bean, early and of very good quality, is the most suitable for market cultivation. Two beans are placed in each hole, spacing the clumps 30 centimetres apart, in rows spaced 50 centimetres apart for large varieties, and 40 centimetres apart for dwarf varieties. When the plar nts are about 1 decimeter high, they are carefully hoeled and lightly buttressed. Later, if they are overgrown with weeds, they are weeded once or twice: then, when they are in full bloom, all the flowering tops are removed, to encourage the formation of beans in the lower pods, which are the only fertile ones. To speed up the bean harvest, you can sow them in a nursery, either under a bell or in the open air, at the foot of a wall facing south, from the end of January onwards; they soon sprout and give quite delicate seedlings that would perish if they weren't sheltered under a blanket of long litter every time it froze; you uncover the beans when it stops freezing. After the end of the extreme cold, around February 15th, weather permitting, the beans are transplanted indoors, two by two, observing the same distances as for in-place sowing. This procedure saves eight to ten days on the natural vegetative growth of beans sown in the open. The bean's enemy is the black aphid, which invades almost instantly, sucking the stems and leaves and killing the plant. If you notice it in time, and the area infested with black aphids is not too large, you can stop their disastrous multiplication by sprinkling the beans with a strong infusion of smoking tobacco known as caporal. Boiling water is poured over the tobacco, at a rate of 60 grams of tobacco per 10 liters of water; the infusion is used to water the beans as soon as it has completely cooled. The market gardener does not let the beans ripen; they are harvested green and sold as a fresh vegetable. A curious experiment, which anyone can verify, consists in cutting the stems of early-growing broad beans at ground level as soon as the green pods have been harvested; the stump immediately sprouts new stems, which flower and bear fruit before the end of autumn. When the beans are about half the normal height for their species, Milan or Brussels sprouts are planted in the gaps between the rows, or carrots are sown; as soon as the bean crop is removed, the land is taken up by another crop, and no time is lost, without any reduction in the fresh bean product. Lentils. Lentils are rarely used in market gardening, because they are the least productive of the leguminous vegetable plants; they flower very little, and each of the pods that follow their flowers contains no more than two seeds. On the other hand, lentils, never eaten as a fresh vegetable, are the most nutritious of all pulses. The plant is native to Asia; Scripture attests that lentils have been cultivated for human consumption in Eastern countries since ancient times. Lentils are sown in the same way as bush beans, under the same soil and fertilizer conditions, and with the same spacing between clumps. The plant must be hoeed at least twice and carefully weeded; it is very sensitive to weeds. The cultivation of lentils is only mentioned here because of the excellence of their seeds; they are so unfruitful that their yield barely covers the cost of cultivation. Those that are commercially available are the product not of market gardening, but of field cultivation. Two distinct species of lentils are grown, the common lentil and the queen lentil; the grain of the latter is grayish-brown, smaller than that of the common species, which is the more widely cultivated of the two. PLANTS WITH EDIBLE LEAVES AND FLOWERS. This section includes a wide variety of vegetable plants belonging to botanical families far removed from one another. These plants occupy a very large place in the market garden and in the cuisine of all European peoples. The vegetable plants whose leaves are eaten are, firstly, cabbages, celery, cardoons, rhubarb, sorrel, spinach, tetragonia, asparagus and salads; and secondly, parsley, chervil, tarragon and civet. These last two plants are mainly grown as salad accessories. There are only two vegetable plants whose flowers are eaten, but their cultivation is one of the most important: cauliflower and artichoke. Cabbage. Cabbage, a member of the Cruciferae family, is one of the oldest cultivated vegetable plants. The health-giving properties of this plant, in addition to its edible qualities, had not escaped the notice of the ancients: history records that, during the four centuries when Rome dispensed with doctors, cabbage, in various forms, but above all as a herbal tea, was the only medicine against all illnesses. This harmless remedy had the merit of letting nature take its course, and of not preventing healing when the ailment was not fatal in itself. The main varieties of cabbage used in market gardening form several groups, including: 1° cabbages with round heads, smooth leaves and blistered leaves, the most esteemed of which are Alsatian white cabbage, sauerkraut cabbage or quintal cabbage; red cabbage, similar in all respects to the above, except for the color of its violet-red leaves; Milan or Savoy cabbage, also known as curly cabbage, with its many sub-varieties, and Brussels sprouts. 2nd group: cone-headed cabbages, the best of which are the cœur de bœuf or pain de sucre; the Y'ork cabbage, the most delicate of this series; the Pomeranian cenic cabbage, good and very voluminous. 3rd group: green cabbages, all of which have in common the characteristic of not peeling, of remaining constantly green, and of withstanding the cold without shelter in the open air. The best green cabbages are: green curly, variegated curly and tricolored curly. The cabbages in this group are the most restricted in use; they are grown only in market gardens in northern France, on the borders of Belgium, where they are widely cultivated and highly prized. All cabbages thrive in strong, fertile soils, with abundant manuring from horned cattle. The soil must be prepared by two deep ploughings; the lighter it is, the more manure needs to be ploughed into it for the cabbages to form large, tender apples. Cabbages, whatever their variety, cannot be sown in the field. The seedling is raised in a nursery and planted permanently when sufficiently developed. When the cabbage plant obtained from sowing has taken its first leaves, it is transplanted in rows, 8 or 10 centimetres apart in all directions. Here, it gains strength for twenty to twenty-five days, while awaiting final planting. It's always a good idea to plant only cabbage plants that are already strong; they always produce the best results. When the soil in the market garden is only mediocrely fertile, as is the case in recently created marshes, to obtain the most beautiful cabbages, you must water them once a week with a watering can without a sheaf, using liquid fertilizer. Cabbages are such a healthy and sought-after vegetable that the market gardener must ensure that markets are supplied with them at all times of the year. To this end, he sows cabbage seed in spring, in the first fortnight of March, which gives him good seedlings to plant in May; he thus obtains summer cabbages delivered for consumption in July and August. He sows a second time in April and May, to have seedlings to transplant in June, whose apples, formed in September, October and November, are kept for sale throughout the winter. A final sowing takes place from August 15th to September 15th, earlier or later, depending on the temperature; sowings are delayed when late summer droughts are prolonged. The seedlings from these sowings are transplanted into beds at the foot of a south-facing wall; if sheltered with straw mats or long litter, they overwinter well in the Paris climate, and can be planted very early in the spring. Conical-headed cabbages are the best for these late sowings; they form their heads the earliest the following spring. By adopting this method, the market gardener has cabbages to sell almost all year round. Brussels sprouts require special care. This cabbage, which belongs to the Savoy cabbage group, always ends up forming a small head at the top of its very tall stem, but it is not grown for this purpose. The armpits of its leaves give rise to very small, hard, tightly packed cabbages of excellent flavor, which have the property of withstanding the cold very well as long as it does not exceed 5 or 6 degrees, especially in a situation sheltered from the north winds. Brussels sprouts can therefore be harvested successively, and markets can be supplied with them for most of the winter. For this purpose, first sow in March to obtain seedlings for planting in May, and harvest small cabbages in September and October; sow a second time in May: the seedlings from these latter sowings give good seedlings for transplanting at the end of June. Brussels sprouts from the last planting are lifted into a clod at the start of winter and placed in a gauge at the foot of a wall facing south, where they can be kept until the end of winter. In this way, Brussels sprouts can be harvested in March and April, and sold with advantage at a time when there are hardly any other fresh vegetables to bring to market. Celery, a member of the Umbelliferae family, is nicknamed "the good herb" in the south of France, where it is found in abundance among the grasses of the damp meadows near the Mediterranean coast. Used as a seasoning, celery facilitates the digestion of a wide range of dishes; it particularly counteracts the cooling properties of certain salads with which it can be combined. Several species of celery are grown, the most prized of which are common, white, red, pink, curly and celeriac, a species entirely different from other cultivated celery. Celery is sown in a nursery, in the open air, in a bed with a southern exposure; the seedlings must be light, so that the plant has become robust by the time it is put in place towards the end of May. Celery is only really good and suitable for its intended use when it has been blanched by shrivelling. To this end, prepare the ground for transplanting as follows. After ploughing it thoroughly and smoking it extensively, we divide it into planks one meter wide, but without separating the planks by paths. From two to two planks, the earth is removed and an ados is formed, resulting in pits alternating with ados: the depth of the pits should be 35 to 40 centimetres. In each pit, four rows of celery are planted, in lines spaced 20 centimetres apart; the plants in the lines are 25 centimetres apart; they must be watered abundantly. As the celery grows in length, the leaves are tied together with rushes or rye straw, and a first ridging is made using some of the soil from the ados. The plant, which you must not tire of watering unless the weather is rainy, continues to elongate; you successively give it a second tie, a second ridging, and later a third, so that all the soil put in ados is used up. The ribs of the celery leaves become white and tender as they wither, while their warm, aromatic flavor softens and becomes more pleasant. At the onset of winter, celery plants are removed in clods, without untying them; their roots are planted in fresh sand, either in the cellar or in a damp-free place where frost cannot reach them; celery will keep there until spring. If you want to grow celery all year round, sow the seed in January and February, so as to have enough seedlings to plant as soon as the weather permits. Celery root, an excellent species widely cultivated by market gardeners in Belgium, Holland and parts of Germany, is little grown in France, because it is rarely used in French cuisine. The seed is sown either on a bed or in the open air, like that of common celery; it is planted in rows, 30 centimetres apart in all directions; it does not need to be ridged. 2. As celery root can only grow and produce good yields with watering, each bed is surrounded by a projecting edge, so that water from watering cannot run off into the paths separating the beds. The useful part of celery is not the root, but the root collar, which, in good, well-smoked soil, watered relentlessly, becomes very voluminous. Celery root from the latest plantings is kept in the cellar, like common celery: it can be delivered for consumption throughout the winter. Before starting to grow this type of celery, the market gardener must make sure that he will find a suitable placement for it; although it is an excellent vegetable, it is not suitable for all consumers. Cardoon. Cardoon, which might just as well be called thistle, since it is a true thistle like the artichoke, its close relative, is, like celeriac, a vegetable that the market gardener should cultivate only with reserve, and by consulting the state of the market. It's eaten all over France, especially in the big cities; but it's rarely eaten, and if too much is produced at once, it may be difficult to find a place for it. Several species of cardoon are grown, all native to southern Europe. The most esteemed are: cardon de Paris, the best of all, cardon d'Espagne, cardon plein and cardon de Tours. The latter, although as good as the others, is less cultivated, because its leaves are armed with prickles that are more or less troublesome for the gardener. n 1 Atiud mtâ-h miemad et Cardoon, a member of the Compositae family, sinks its roots deep into the soil. When the soil has been well ploughed and fertilized, lines are drawn lengthwise and widthwise, 80 centimetres apart in all directions. At the points where these lines intersect, pits 50 centimetres in diameter and 30 centimetres deep are dug and filled with half-decomposed manure; a layer of loam one decimetre thick is spread over the well-trampled manure. Sow three cardoon seeds in each hole, to obtain three plants, of which the two least vigorous will be removed later. Sowing in place in this way should only be done in April, when any return of late cold weather is no longer to be feared. These seedlings are transplanted from May 10 to 15, under the same conditions of fertilization and spacing as for sowing in situ. Cardoon seedlings need to be watered every day it doesn't rain; this seed only sprouts after thirty days. As the seedling develops quite slowly, you can make use of the intervals by growing radishes and chervil, or transplanting early lettuce seedlings. These can be harvested before the cardoons have taken over the whole field. The leaves, whose fleshy ribs are the only edible part of the plant, only reach their full length towards the end of September, when the seed has been sown. At this point, they need to be bleached. Once the leaves have been bundled together with three ties of rye straw, they are covered with a shirt of straw, the spikes of which must be in their natural position; the shirts are held together with three ties; the thicker they are, the more rapid and complete the leaf erosion. To keep the straw in place, the base of each tuft of cardoon is mounded so as to cover the bottom of each straw sleeve with earth, which keeps it in place even in strong winds. We don't blanch all the cardoons at once; once etiolated, they would soon rot; we only blanch the quantity that needs to be sent to market each week. Rhubarb. The petioles or tails of the leaves of various rhubarb varieties, and the jams made from these cooked leaves, sieved through an iron sieve and combined with sugar, have not yet taken on the same importance in French cuisine as they do in English. Near Paris, Tours, Montpellier and other towns inhabited for part of the year by numerous English families, it will be to his advantage to grow rhubarb in proportion to the presumed output; elsewhere, the product of this crop would not sell. Several varieties of rhubarb are grown, the most popular of which are the early Ayton, the wavy rhubarb, the Prince Albert and the currant rhubarb. Rhubarb, a member of the Polygonaceae family, multiplies by separating rooted offshoots. Nothing is hardier than this plant, which thrives in all soils and exposures; as the plant grows, it must be planted at a distance of one meter in all directions. As the leaf ribs or petioles lengthen, the base of the plant is milled to whiten them; the leaves are harvested for sale, leaving only those closest to the center, which grow and are picked in turn. When rhubarb is ready to flower, a bud forms in the center of the leaves, destined to become the plant's flowering stalk; it has been suggested that this central shoot should be processed like cauliflower. Although this vegetable has been highly praised under the name rhufleur, we are among those who regard it as mediocre, incapable of competing with choufleur. However, it is necessary to point out that the word rhubarb wrongly awakens in the mind of the French consumer the idea of a purgative and a medicinal flavor. This flavor, as well as the medicinal properties of rhubarb, reside exclusively in the root; the ribs of the leaves and the central bud are completely devoid of it and have, all prejudices aside, no taste whatsoever reminiscent of pharmacy. Sorrel. Sorrel, a type of the rumex genus, is one of the vegetable plants that French cuisine can least do without. Although it does not nourish in the true sense of the word, cooked and chopped sorrel seasons eggs, meat and fish, and helps to digest them; its pleasant acidity compensates for what it lacks in nutritional properties. Several varieties of sorrel are grown, the best of which are Belleville sorrel and the broad-leafed Dutch sorrel. For summer consumption, we also grow virgin sorrel, so named because it produces neither flowers nor seeds. Sorrel can be propagated either by sowing in place, in the borders around vegetable garden squares, or by dividing clumps in spring. Near large cities, market gardeners plant entire beds of sorrel, with clumps spaced 25 centimetres apart, so that they cover the whole ground. As the first frosts approach, a thick bed of straw or long litter is spread over these beds; under this shelter, winter does not interrupt the vegetation of the sorrel, whose underdeveloped leaves sell for a good price throughout the bad season. Every time the weather gets milder, the cover is moved, to be put back in place in case of frost; in this way, the market gardener has tender sorrel to take to market all year round. The more sun sorrel is exposed to, the more acidic it becomes; it is milder when grown in the shade, with a northern exposure. Sorrel requires no cultivation care other than removing the flower stalks as they form: this is not necessary when only virgin sorrel is grown. Although a plantation of sorrel can last almost indefinitely, the plant being perennial to the highest degree, it is a good idea to renew plantations every three years if you want to obtain a constant abundance of good leaves. Like sorrel, spinach is devoid of nutritive properties, and does not make up for this defect with a strong flavor. Nevertheless, it is widely consumed in France, and its cultivation is indispensable in the market garden. Spinach is especially advantageous because of the short time it takes to grow, which means it can be used to fill in a garden square left vacant by another crop when the bad season approaches. Spinach, a member of the Atripliaceae family, is dioecious and biennial; it bears male and female flowers on separate stems, and does not set seed until the second year. Spinach seed is broadcast, either in spring or late summer. The products of this 3 crop are not sufficiently valuable to allow it to be tended and fertilized on its own; spinach benefits from the remains of the fertilizer given to a previous crop. Several varieties of spinach are grown, the two best of which are the round-seeded Dutch spinach and the Esquernes spinach, both with broader leaves and better taste than the common species. Spinach of these two varieties should be thinned out when fully emerged, so that the clumps are about 20 to 25 centimetres apart. The first frosts that hit spinach give the leaves a faded appearance and a semi-transparency that could make them look lost; to restore their good appearance, dip them for a good quarter of an hour in very cold water; take them out to let them drain well and lay them on the ground on clean straw, in a frost-free place. As soon as it has dried out, the spinach returns to its original state, making it just as good for cooking as if it hadn't suffered from the cold. Every year, a portion of the previous year's spinach is set aside as seed. The male plants are pulled out after flowering; the seeds of the female plants are harvested as soon as they have reached maturity. Tetragonia. This New Zealand plant, introduced to Europe towards the end of the last century, is so similar in flavor to spinach that, when cooked with the same seasoning, it is impossible to distinguish one from the other. Tetragonia has the advantage over spinach of not going to seed during the heat of summer; as we know, when spinach does go to seed, its leaf product, the only edible part of the plant, becomes nil. Despite this property, tetragonia is rarely cultivated in vegetable gardens, because the gap it is intended to fill, as a replacement for spinach, occurs in a season when the market garden is over-supplied with vegetables of superior value, which make spinach and tetragonia scorned. This plant is grown from point to point like spinach: it just needs to be sown very lightly, as its creeping stems take up a lot of space. Asparagus. Asparagus is one of the most important crops to grow in a market garden; its products are always sought-after and sold at a good price; there is never enough in proportion to demand. Asparagus, a member of the Aspariginea family, has a particular vegetation characteristic that must be taken into account before starting to grow it. It requires a lot of manure, and only begins to repay the gardener's advances with its produce after four years. Land that has previously borne asparagus, which has died of old age, can no longer produce asparagus unless it has been given over to other crops for 10 to 12 years; otherwise, asparagus refuses to grow there. It is therefore important to make sure that the land on which you intend to establish an asparagus plantation has not borne asparagus for at least 10 years; without this information, asparagus cultivation, carried out in the most rational way, on land that is best suited to this plant, may fail completely. Asparagus cultivation is not like many other garden crops, possible only in the vicinity of cities, where thousands of horses, either luxury or draught, make large quantities of manure available for gardening. The old method of piling up masses of largely wasted manure under asparagus is now abandoned; asparagus cultivation can produce excellent produce by absor3 bing as much fertilizer as any other garden crop, but nothing more. There are two methods for creating a large asparagus plantation, both equally good in terms of the final result: sowing in place, or planting out. In-place sowing is more economical; it's the procedure generally followed in very large-scale cultivation. Here's how it works. The entire plot is divided into one-meter-wide beds, as for celery. From every other bed, 25 centimetres of soil is removed and transferred to the next bed, creating a series of pits alternating with ados. The bottom of the pits is broken up with a spade, and heavily manured with horse or cattle manure; cattle manure is the best. The soil, smoked and well levelled with a rake, is covered with a thin layer of only 5 to 6 centimetres of good loam from broken layers; the asparagus seed is sown in this loam, in three lines for each pit. The two lines adjacent to the edge of the pit should be 25 centimetres apart; the third line occupies the middle of each pit, at equal distance from the other two lines. The seeds are placed, two in each hole, 25 centimetres apart in the lines. When the seed emerges, the young asparagus, similar to a green thread, can barely be seen; weeding must wait until it is 5 to 6 centimetres high. Asparagus seedlings must be weeded by hand; this work can only be entrusted to attentive workers, otherwise part of the plant will be pulled up with the weeds. A second and, if necessary, third weeding is carried out to prevent the weed from smothering the asparagus plant. Ados are used to grow dwarf, early peas, York sprouts, dwarf beans, strawberries or other low-growing plants; the produce from these crops helps to wait for the asparagus crop. Every year, in November, the yellowed asparagus stalks are cut off at ground level, and a few centimetres of soil taken from the asparagus stalks is thrown back into the pits. In the spring of the second year, the asparagus beds are covered with half a layer of fertilizer, and weeded if necessary during the summer months; the same cultivation is continued in the following years; asparagus harvesting does not begin until the fourth year. From then on, well-established asparagus beds in good soil - light and sandy rather than clayey and compact - can remain productive for twelve to fifteen years without interruption. After five or six years, the asparagus plants have disappeared, and the beds are levelled: every year, 4 to 5 centimetres of soil are removed to replenish the asparagus beds. Soil is then taken from the place where the teenagers were, for annual replanting. When the asparagus plantation is exhausted, it forms its own ados separated by pits in which asparagus cultivation can be restarted, in new soil, with every chance of success. The soil of the asparagus farm, exhausted as far as as asparagus is concerned, is as fertile as its nature requires for all kinds of other vegetable crops. The second method differs from the first in only one respect: instead of sowing the asparagus seed in situ, we plant two-year-old asparagus claws raised in nurseries, which we place in the pits prepared as above, and at the distances indicated for sowing. Each asparagus claw consists of a bundle of elongated tubers called fingers, joined together on a central tray. When planting the claws, care should be taken not to spread their fingers too far apart, as they break easily, and to place them on a mound made of a handful of potting soil, so that there is no gap underneath, which could lead to mildew and delay their growth. In claw plantations, the first large asparagus should not be harvested until the third year, although by the second year there are some large enough for consumption. Asparagus plants harvested too early are ruined and have no future. The method of planting clumps of asparagus saves a year, but the high cost of clumps often makes this method inapplicable to very large-scale cultivation. Each year, the central plate from which the asparagus claw fingers extend rises and moves closer to the soil surface; it is this particular feature of asparagus vegetation that obliges the grower to replenish the asparagus beds with soil every year. If this depth is not taken into account when the asparagus is harvested, the tray can be attacked, killing a large number of claws just as their produce is about to reward the gardener for three or four years of careful cultivation. To cut the asparagus between two burrows, special knives are used, the use of which requires a certain degree of skill and experience. The work of harvesting asparagus should only be entrusted to a trained hand. A certain number of asparagus stalks laden with berries are left in the field a little longer than others, in order to let them ripen completely and harvest the seeds for sowing, either in the field or in a nursery. When the skin of these berries is wrinkled and the seeds inside are black, they should be picked. After letting them dry out completely in the shade, they are macerated in water for twelve hours. The pulp then separates from the seeds when the berries are rubbed between the fingers; the seeds, carefully washed and dried, are kept in a dry place until sowing time. Asparagus seeds are sown in nurseries in the second week of March, or a little later in late spring. The soil is prepared as for any other garden crop; the asparagus seed is sown clear, in rows spaced 25 centimetres apart; they should be covered with no more than a centimetre of finely pulverized soil; if it is buried too deeply, it will not sprout. When pulling out the young claws, either to sell them or to use them in plantations, the soil must be carefully lifted on both sides, so as not to break the fingers, which are excessively fragile at this age. Although asparagus has long been cultivated in Europe, it has not produced any distinct varieties. Common asparagus, Ghent asparagus and Ulm asparagus are considered sub-varieties, differing only in the volume of their stalks. If you sow the seeds of the very common wild asparagus along the Rhône valley, and on the banks of ravines throughout the south of France, and then cultivate the plant resulting from these sowings, under the ordinary conditions of good cultivation, you will obtain in three or four years asparagus that is very similar to the common species. Forced asparagus. When you have a large plantation of asparagus in full yield, you can force a part of it every year by the following procedure. At the start of winter, wooden boxes similar to those used for glazed frames for all forced cultivations are placed on the beds to be forced. Instead of glazed frames, as forced cultivation of asparagus requires no light, the chests can be lined with thin boards or frames covered with coarse canvas. The inside of the trunks is filled with good manure recently taken from the stable, in full fermentation without being too damp; the trunks are covered, and whenever it freezes a little severely, a thick blanket of long litter is thrown over them. Unless the cold is very intense and persistent, asparagus should start to grow after fifteen to twenty days. This is ensured by carefully disturbing the manure, and the asparagus is harvested as it grows, so that its top end takes on the violet hue it needs to sell well. We take advantage of the middle of the day, when the temperature is mildest, to momentarily uncover the forced asparagus beds; we cover them in the afternoon. If all the asparagus supplied by the beds subjected to this treatment is harvested, the claws are exhausted and the land must be given over to other crops. However, if the harvest is stopped in time, and each claw is left with a sufficient number of young shoots to repair its losses and regain its vigor, the forced beds can be planted again after a year's rest, during which they produce their usual quota of asparagus in spring, at the ordinary time of their natural vegetation. It goes without saying that in Paris and all major cities, asparagus forced in winter fetches very good prices. Not all the beds that need to be forced during a winter season are forced at the same time; in this way, it is possible to have very fine forced asparagus to bring to market, from mid-December until the time when the first asparagus can be harvested in the open air. Salads. Vegetables whose leaves are eaten raw, seasoned with salt, oil and vinegar, play an important role in market gardening, especially in France, where lettuce is widely consumed by all ranks of society. A military proverb says that when the drum beats to call the soldier to his main meal, his drumbeat means: soupe et salade, soupe et salade! The origin of the word salade is uncertain; the most likely opinion is that it derives from the name of a helmet of a particular shape, once worn by the soldiers of the famous Sah-el-Eddin, whom the Crusaders called Saladin. During the siege of Naples, the soldiers of Charles VIII's army, lacking salad bowls, put lettuces from the surrounding gardens into this type of helmet, which was then called salad. On their return to France, where they introduced the use of salad, they named the dish after the helmet in which they had begun to eat it. According to this interpretation, there is a fairly direct relationship between the name of Sultan Saladin and that of salad. Those who believe that this name derives from Italian, because in Italy lettuces have been grown and eaten from ancient times to the present day, seem to be mistaken; for Italians have always called lettuce insalata, a term that only remotely resembles the French word salade. In market gardens, lettuce and chicory are mainly grown as salads, with lamb's lettuce and raipons also being eaten. In the North, red cabbage is also eaten as a salad, sliced very thinly and sprinkled with melted butter and vinegar; but this salad is not very popular anywhere else, and even in the North, red cabbage is never grown specifically for salad. Lettuce is the salad par excellence. In many départements, when the word "salad" is uttered, it is lettuce alone that is meant. The innumerable varieties of lettuce produced by cultivation are naturally classified into two sections, that of round-headed lettuces, which are the lettuces proper, and that of elongated-headed lettuces, better known by their vulgar name of romaine. The first section is subdivided into several groups, according to the temperament of the sub-varieties, which makes them suitable for cultivation in different seasons. Round lettuce, like romaine, was not cultivated very long ago in France. Letters written by Rabelais to his patron Cardinal d'Estrées from Rome in 1527 show that he sent him the first lettuce seeds to be sown in France; lettuce cultivation did not become common in our kitchen gardens until the end of the same century. Round-headed lettuces are divided into three groups: spring lettuces, summer lettuces and winter lettuces. The best spring lettuces are: dauphine, cordon rouge and petite blonde. The best summer lettuces are blonde de Versailles, blonde laesseuse, belle et bonne, royale and Batavia cabbage lettuce. The latter, the largest and hardiest of them all, forms enormous apples; it is the one that is cultivated in large quantities to make it 3. consumed by the pores, whose fattening it promotes by inducing them to sleep. It is also from this lettuce that we extract, by chemical processes, the calming principle called Tridace, which produces some of the effects of opium, without having its dangerous properties. The best winter lettuces are crepe, gotte and passion lettuces. In the romaine section, the most esteemed are: verte hâtive, alphange, maraichère d'été and blonde de Brunoy. In addition to the above-mentioned lettuces and romaines, there are innumerable sub-varieties, recommended for various reasons, and more or less well suited to the soil and local climate of the cantons where they are grown. The cultivation of all round-headed lettuces is the same: the seed, sown on a bed in late winter, or later on a bed in the open air, produces a plant which is placed at varying distances according to the size of the species, from 25 centimetres for the smallest to 40 centimetres for the largest. When transplanting lettuces, great care must be taken not to crush the root collar, which has very little consistency. The soil is covered with a good mulch of long litter, to keep it cool. The success of this cultivation depends entirely on the possibility of watering the lettuces frequently and abundantly; as soon as they suffer from drought, they go to seed, even the lazy lettuce, which is the most difficult of all to set. Forced cultivation of winter lettuces is achieved by transplanting the young plant from the bed where the seeds were sown to another warm or simply cold bed, uncovered from its frame. The soil in the layer must be very close to the glass of the frame, so that there is as little air as possible between the lettuce and the inner surface of the glass panes: this is what market gardeners call growing lettuce "à l'étouffée". Crepe lettuce and gotte lettuce are not good salads when grown stewed; if you brought similar lettuces to the market in summer, they would not find buyers; but in winter, when there are no better ones available, they are always easily sold at a good price. Romaine is grown in the same way as round lettuce in the open air, except for one point. When it's windy, it naturally caps itself, as market gardeners say, i.e. its leaves fold over each other at the top. To ensure that the inner leaves become white and tender, the romaines should be tied with a straw or rush tie around the middle of their height. The need for watering is the same for romaine as for round lettuces; if romaine doesn't climb as easily when it lacks water, it becomes hard, and its leaves look much more like fodder than salad. Green romaine is fortified under a bell in spring as follows. The seed sown on a bed in January and February is transplanted under large melon cloches, on an uncovered cold bed set up at the foot of a wall facing south. On this layer lined with potting soil, the hords of the cloches are first marked, tracing circles close together. The romaine plant is transplanted into these circles with the same care as for the round lettuce plant. The bells are then placed back on the romaine plants, which, by this method of forced cultivation, never become very good or very large; they are nonetheless of very good quality, because all they meet on the markets to compete with them are the crepe lettuces and forced gottes, which are even inferior to them in quality. Chicory. Chicory, of whatever variety, is a salad that is always a little firm, and whose bitterness is not to everyone's taste; it is, moreover, very healthy, and possesses the valuable property of being easy to preserve for consumption throughout the winter. The main varieties used in market gardening are curly endive, the best of which are Italian, Meaux and Rouen; the latter is known as stag's horn because of the shape of its leaves. Another variety of whole-leaf chicory, widely used as a winter salad, is also grown under the names escarole, escarole and endive. It should be noted that while curly-leaf and whole-leaf chicories are mainly grown as salads, this is not their only use: they are also used cooked and chopped like sorrel or spinach, either on their own or as an accompaniment to other dishes, fatty or lean. Chicory cultivation is similar to that of the Romans. The seed, sown early on a bed or in a flowerbed at the foot of a south-facing wall, will not germinate if it is over-covered; it must be spread over the soil and a little potting soil sifted on top; for these first sowings, which can be done outdoors from the end of February, Italian chicory is the most successful. The seedling is planted out, watered and tied like romaine, so that the leaves in the center of the plant whiten as a result of shrivelling; if these leaves elongate sufficiently, they are joined together later by a second tie. Other curly-leaf varieties can be sown throughout the summer, until July. Care should be taken to bind these lettuces only when the weather is dry; if a prolonged drought makes it necessary to water them after they have been bound, only the watering can without its sheaf should be used, so that water can be poured at the foot of each leaf without wetting the head. Escarole, known as endive throughout northern France, is best sown in July and August than in any other season, its growth being rapid when sufficiently watered, and is successively tied in September and October; it turns white before the first frosts, and can be stored in a cellar or storeroom, protected from frost, as a winter supply; it is less afraid of the cold than of dampness. In the market gardens around Lille, escarole is whitened by a more expeditious process than binding: when the leaves spread out on the ground have reached their full length, the gardener joins them together at their tips, tilts them all to the same side, and with a spade throws enough earth over the tips to contain them: the heart of the escarole thus treated whitens in a short time, as if it had been bound. From the moment they have undergone this operation, they must not be watered again; this method only works in light, dry soil. In addition to the chicory varieties described above, wild chicory is also grown as a salad; but this is not a very profitable crop, and is grown more in the field than in the garden. The market gardener, however, sows wild chicory seed in the borders throughout the summer; as it emerges, the leaves, only a few centimetres long, are picked and sold to be eaten as salad; they are only edible during the first period of their vegetation; later, they can only be used as rabbit food. Wild chicory sown in the open field, in mediocre soil, at a rate of one kilogram of seed per are, is used to prepare a very healthy but somewhat tough salad in winter, using the following procedure. At the start of winter, chicory is carefully pulled up so as not to break the roots, which should be kept as whole as possible. The plants are peeled one by one; all the leaves are removed, except those of the central shoot. The chicory thus prepared is bound into bunches, with the collars of all the roots at the same level. These bunches are taken to a perfectly dark cellar, where they are buried, either upright or horizontally, in a layer of warm manure, or simply in moderately moist soil. The long, white, etiolated leaves soon develop, and are sold as talad under the vulgar name of Capuchin beard. Lamb's lettuce. Lamb's lettuce, also known by the vulgar names of dodder, wheat salad and hare's ear, is so common throughout the bad season in all winter cereal fields, that we could dispense with cultivating it in market gardens, where it never holds a very large place. If it's true that its name derives from the need to chew it for a long time in order to swallow it, we can see that it has always been considered a hédiocre salad. Lamb's lettuce can be sown in August and September, and even as late as October, when the good weather extends into the late season. The flatter and more fertile the soil in which it is sown, the less hard it is; frost softens it considerably; it is only when the lamb's lettuce has been subjected to a few days of severe frost that it produces a salad that is more or less edible: that's all we can reasonably ask of it. Rapunzel. Like lamb's lettuce, raiponce grows wild everywhere in France; its stems, laden with pretty blue bells, adorn the foot of hedges and the edges of woods throughout the summer. It is equal in all respects, except size, to the cultivated raiponce; the root, white and tender, has a nutty flavor; the leaves are as soft and less hard than those of lamb's lettuce. If you want to harvest wild raiponces at the most suitable stage of development, so that they can accompany lamb's lettuce or forced lettuce salads at the beginning of spring, you need to look for them in places where, the previous summer, you noticed flowering plants, whose seeds must have multiplied raiponces by natural sowing; the time for this search begins at the end of February and ends in the first week of April; wild raiponces lose their value as salads from the moment their flowering stems form. Riponce seed can be sown from spring to late summer; but the plant from spring sowing is prone to bolting in autumn; besides, raiponces from spring sowing are good to pick at a time when the best lettuces abound in the market garden. Sow in July, without burying the seed, which should only be placed on the surface of the soil, otherwise it won't germinate. The roots can already be harvested in part at the end of winter; as the plant is insensitive to cold, winter does it no harm; its young shoots, together with its roots, provide an excellent early spring salad. Parsley. Although parsley is only used as a seasoning, it is so widely used in French cuisine that its presence in the market garden at any time of year is considered indispensable. Only two varieties, common parsley and curly parsley, are generally grown. Unfortunately, the common parsley closely resembles the large and especially the small hemlock, and this resemblance has more than once given rise to deplorable accidents. The best way to avoid them is to grow only curly parsley, whose leaves bear no resemblance to either the common or common hemlock, and so cannot give rise to any fatal misunderstandings. Parsley seed is sown mainly in borders, from the first fine days of March. Patience is essential, as it takes 5 to 6 weeks to sprout. The plant flowers and goes to seed in its second year; but if you take care to prevent flowering by cutting the stems as they form, you can extend its life for three years. Near large cities, where parsley is in great demand in winter, a bed is sown with a southern exposure; as the first frosts approach, this bed is covered with straw or long litter, which is moved during the mildest hours of the day. With this care, parsley sown in the open air doesn't freeze, and winter doesn't completely interrupt the growth of its leaves. When sowing parsley in summer, with a view to harvesting the leaves in winter, it's a good idea to cover the seedlings with moss that is kept constantly moist. From the thirty-fifth day onwards, the seedlings are visited daily, in order to remove the moss and remove it completely as soon as the parsley has emerged from the ground. Chervil. Chervil is frequently used, mainly as a salad ingredient. Chervil is an annual plant, which goes to seed as soon as the first warm spells arrive. Consequently, seedlings should be sown in light, cool soil, with a northern or eastern exposure, every eight or ten days during the summer. Chervil seeds set after 5 to 6 days; the plant requires no cultivation care other than a few waterings in times of drought. Common chervil closely resembles little hemlock; it is only lighter green, and the divisions of its leaves are less acute; but these differences are easily overlooked, and many cases of poisoning are the result. They could be avoided by adopting exclusively curly chervil, a variety as easy to grow as the common species; but curly chervil's strong flavour displeases most consumers. The market gardener is therefore strongly advised to weed his chervil beds himself or have them weeded before his eyes, so that he does not have to reproach himself for having left a few stalks of small hemlock on the beds, and for having sold a deadly poison mixed with a supply of lettuce. Tarragon, a very aromatic plant, has a much more limited use than parsley and chervil; it is included in salad supplies, and is also used to flavor the vinegar in which pickles are to be preserved. The plant is not important enough to be cultivated other than as a border plant in the driest part of the kitchen garden, as it is very sensitive to excess humidity. In France's average climate, tarragon rarely flowers or ripens seed; it is propagated exclusively by dividing clumps. In order to always have young, tender tarragon shoots at hand, it's a good idea to cut the whole plant down to ground level from time to time; older stems become too aromatic, and are too hard to be used as salad greens. Civet. Civet, the smallest of the bulbous plants permitted in the market garden, has a scent reminiscent of garlic and onion, but to a less pronounced and still pleasant degree. It is planted as a border plant along squares, and is only ever used in very small quantities. When you don't have occasion to use it, you sometimes forget to cut it; then it flowers, and the clumps thin out; you must therefore be careful to cut civet very often, even when you don't need it. Tufts should be split every two years; it's one of the most pleasant of all salad supplies. Cauliflower. Cauliflower is the most widely tasted of the edible flowering vegetable plants, and although it contains little solid matter, it is an excellent food that is healthy, pleasant to the taste and easy to digest. Cultivation has produced several very good varieties, known expressively as tender, semi-hard and hard. Tender cauliflower is the earliest-growing; it has narrow leaves and forms only small apples; semi-hard cauliflower, a little slower to form than the preceding variety, is the most widely grown; its apples are medium-sized and of excellent quality. Hard cauliflower is the hardiest of all, i.e. the least sensitive to cold; it is suitable for very large-scale cultivation, because it requires little care once it is in place, and can be grown with little more ceremony than the large Alsatian white cabbage. Its shortcoming, which makes it excluded by many gardeners, is its slow growth, which means it takes up a lot of land, but it produces very large, white, firm apples of the highest quality. The sub-varieties are, among the tender varieties, petit Salomon, early, very white, but not very developed; among the semi-hard varieties, gros Salomon, with a very voluminous apple, and among the hard varieties, choufleur Lenormand, recently obtained from seed by the gardener who gave it its name. The latter, in good soil, can become enormous; it's the best of the late cabbages. To have early spring cauliflowers, sow the early cauliflower seed between the two Notre-Dame days, as the gardeners say, i.e. from August 15 to September 15, a little earlier or later, depending on the state of the weather. The plant, as soon as it has four leaves, is transplanted under a cold frame as the first white frosts approach, which it cannot withstand; it is given plenty of air as long as it does not freeze; it thus spends the winter, thanks to assiduous care aimed at preserving it from the cold, and preventing it from withering away for want of air and light. In February or March, as soon as the season permits, the cauliflower plant is placed in the open air. Not all of those planted first succeed; the latest returns from the late cold sweep away some of them; those that survive, albeit small in volume, always fetch a good price. Two precautions are necessary for the successful cultivation of early cauliflowers: 1° at the time of planting, as little time as possible should elapse between uprooting and planting; 2° after watering the cauliflowers for a few days to ensure their recovery, they should not be watered for a fortnight, even in the event of drought; observation has shown that this procedure hastens apple formation by eight to ten days. To obtain cauliflowers that can be harvested immediately after the first season, we sow semi-hard cauliflower seed on a bed and under a frame in February and March, not so much to prevent the plant from freezing, now that the severe cold has passed, as to accelerate its growth. Another layer is kept ready, on which the seedling is transplanted a fortnight after it has emerged; it is not put out in the open until the end of April or the first days of May, when the temperature has completely eased. These second-seeded cauliflowers bear their apples in June and July. In the first days of May, sow the seed of ordinary hard cauliflower or Lenormand cauliflower in the open air, in a well-smoked bed; the plant requires no care other than a few weedings; it can be planted without prior transplanting, and subsequently treated like white cabbage, except for a few waterings which it may need in the event of a long drought. Late cauliflower doesn't bear its apples until late autumn. They can be stored in the same way as cabbages, and sold with advantage throughout the bad season, when markets are absolutely short of other fresh vegetables. Artichoke. Artichoke cultivation in France has suffered serious setbacks in recent years, due to the inconstancy of the seasons. Nevertheless, it remains one of the most advantageous market garden crops, wherever it is well managed, and it can be so wherever this plant can be given water and manure at discretion. The artichoke is a thistle that grows wild in southern Spain; it has been cultivated in France to produce very good varieties, the most highly regarded of which are: 1° the artichoke from Laon, with very divergent pointed scales, which is rightly considered the best of all; 2° the large artichoke from Tours, with scales stuck together and notched at the top; 3° the small artichoke without hay, from southern France. The edible part of the artichoke consists of the common receptacle of flowers picked before they bloom. Artichokes are propagated either by sowing their seeds, or by separating the offshoots or eyelets that grow in large numbers around the old plants; the second method of propagation is the most commonly used; the seedling does not constantly reproduce the variety that provided the seed; part of this plant bears leaves armed with prickles; it turns into a thistle, as gardeners say. However, this method of propagating artichokes is often necessary when, as a result of an exceptionally harsh winter, all the seedlings from the eyelets have perished. In such cases, when the seedling is strong enough, it is sorted out and any plants that do not seem to be true to species are eliminated. The carnation plant is detached from the

It overwinters with a good covering of long litter, which is removed in mild weather and replaced in snowy or frosty conditions. In spring, the grommets, rooted or not, are placed 80 centimetres or 1 metre apart. Each eyelet is fitted with a heel, making it easy to take as a cutting if it had no roots formed when it was placed. Holes 50 centimetres in diameter and the same depth are opened for planting; the soil extracted from the holes is mixed with its volume of half-consumed manure; the artichokes are planted in this mixture; a small circular pit is created around each plant to retain water from watering. For eight to ten days, the artichokes must be watered generously every evening; they are then given over to the natural course of their vegetation; some of them produce heads during September; but the plantation is only fully productive in its second year, when it has not been destroyed by winter, which it does not always get through without accident. At the onset of winter, artichoke vines are firmly ridged; the eyelets needed to maintain the plantation are removed, and the heart of the plant is left uncovered. Dry leaves or long litter are placed between the artichokes. In the event of frost, the artichokes are covered in no time at all, and uncovered with the same ease whenever the weather permits. Despite this care, frost in winter and rot in spring often depopulate the plantation. Moreover, if the work of covering and uncovering artichokes is possible in a market garden of mediocre size, it becomes materially impossible in a plantation of several hectares. The gardeners who cultivate the marshes known as hortillons around Amiens (Somme), overcome this difficulty by treating artichoke cultivation in the same way as any other annual vegetable. The plant is raised, put in place, smoked and watered as described above, and not left to its own devices as soon as it has taken possession of the land, as is the usual method; it continues to be watered generously three times a day. Watered in this way, the artichokes grow rapidly, producing all their heads in August and September. When all the artichokes have been harvested, the eyelets are detached from the stumps and placed in gauges for the following year's planting, after which all the artichokes are pulled up and thrown into the manure, which naturally saves the market gardener the trouble of protecting them from the cold during the bad season. It's easy to see that this type of annual artichoke cultivation is only possible when you can water constantly, as the gardeners of Amiens do, whose marshes are cut by canals derived from the Somme. But in France, there is no shortage of land suitable for market gardening, crossed by watercourses or close to a river or pond. It is there and not elsewhere that the annual cultivation of artichokes could and should be carried out on a large scale, and if this were the case, this excellent vegetable, whose price so often puts it beyond the reach of a large number of consumers, could be produced cheaply and in abundance; for the alternations of dearth and profusion that are the consequence of the artichoke's present mode of cultivation would be replaced by a very regular production, always proportionate to consumer needs. Artichokes, treated in the usual way, last for three years; after this time, the plantation must be renewed. Every year, a certain number of the most beautiful plants with well-formed heads are set aside at the end of autumn; these plants are lifted into rootballs and planted in fresh sand, in a sound cellar or any other frost-free location; in this way, a few artichokes are available for sale in winter. HII SECTION. PLANTS WITH EDIBLE FRUIT. Vegetable plants with edible fruit, although not as important for food as the plants in the previous sections, are nevertheless of great value to the market gardener, as their produce is always sought-after and easy to sell at good prices on the markets of large towns. These plants, a source of fortune for those who know how to cultivate them well, are strawberries, tomatoes, melons, cucumbers, pumpkins and various species of edible squash. Strawberries. Few fruits are more widely tasted than the strawberry: so there isn't a garden, large or small, where the strawberry plant isn't cultivated. Artificial or accidental cross-breeding of cultivated strawberry plants has produced a profusion of varieties, classified in two distinct sections. The first includes remontant strawberry plants, native to Europe, which can flower and bear fruit several times in the course of the summer; the second includes all strawberry plants of American origin, which do not remont, and bear fruit only once a year: 1° the Montlhéry strawberry, with large, square-shaped, very smoky fruit; 2° the Alpes des quatre saisons strawberry, known as the strawberry of all months, the most frankly remontant and the most widely grown of all strawberry plants; 3° the Saint-Gilles strawberry, a variety not very different from the previous one; 4° the Gaillon strawberry bush. The section of non-remontant strawberries, on the other hand, is very rich in very large-fruited sub-varieties, all of which have the same drawback for the gardener: they occupy the land uselessly all year round, and only bear fruit for a few weeks during the summer. A volume could be filled with a descriptive catalog of the strawberry varieties in this section; sowings go on every year, giving rise to new varieties that surpass and displace the old ones; anyone who, in his sowings, obtains a strawberry of this section as frankly remontant as the Alpine strawberry, will have made his fortune. In general, all fruits of this section, which end in a point, are very pronouncedly acidic, even when perfectly ripe; those with a more or less rounded tip are rather too sweet than too acidic. The most popular species at present (1861) are Prince Imperial, Goliath, Princess Alice Maude, Deptford Seedlny, Prince Albert, Wilmott superbe, Liège and Chile strawberries. These last two strawberry plants are remarkable, one for its great earliness, the other for the extraordinary volume of its fruit; of all known strawberry plants, it produces the largest strawberries. Remontant strawberries. These are the favorite strawberry plants of the market gardener, who can, with careful watering, bring strawberries from remontant strawberry plants to market for five months, and who would only sell strawberries for five weeks if he stuck to growing strawberry plants that don't remontant. Soil suitable for strawberry cultivation must be fertile, rather light than clayey; it is prepared by two careful ploughings with a spade and abundant manuring. If the soil is infested with white grubs (cockchafer larvae), before planting strawberries, you can sow it with rapeseed, which is then ploughed in a few days before planting. The white grubs, brought into contact with the rotted rapeseed, die immediately. This procedure does not completely free strawberry plants from white grubs; some hanncton eggs remain in the ground, hatching later and giving rise to new legions of larvae; but rapeseed, buried green as plant fertilizer, always destroys some of them; moreover, it is very favorable to strawberry plant vegetation. Strawberries can be propagated either by sowing, or by using seedlings from nets or runners, or by dividing tufts of varieties that do not run. Seedlings are mainly used in the hope of obtaining new varieties. A few of the most beautiful strawberries of the species you wish to propagate by sowing are left to ripen completely, then dried out. The seed is then detached from the fruit and sown immediately, in a mixture of equal parts of potting soil and heather earth. The seedling, which is very small at first, is pricked out in the open air and planted in the ground; it flowers and bears its first fruit the following year. The first runners to form, when the strawberry plants start growing again in spring, are the ones that provide the best plant; they are pulled up a month before planting. Each plant is peeled separately, cleaned of superfluous leaves, and prepared to form young roots by cutting off those already present, half of which are removed lengthwise. The plant thus dressed, according to the accepted expression, is put in nursery, in very close rows, in a slightly shaded garden bed. The best time for this operation is August; if there are droughts, the young strawberry plant should be watered every day. During September and, if the weather is mild, into the first fortnight of October, the nursery stock is planted, and the soil is covered with an abundant mulch of long litter. This mulch keeps the soil cool, prevents watering from compacting the soil too tightly around the roots of the strawberry plants, inhibits weed growth and, during the strawberry season, prevents the fruit from becoming soiled by direct contact with the soil. Strawberries from a well-mulched strawberry field can be served for dessert without first being washed, thus retaining all their delicate taste and fragrance. Gardeners can choose between two varieties of strawberry plants that do not spin: the red-fruited Gaillon bush and the white-fruited Gaillon bush, both of which are similar to the four-season Alpine strawberry plants in terms of foliage, fruit shape and quality. These two strawberry plants, because of the absence of netting, are especially suited to being planted as borders around vegetable garden squares. Once the strawberry plant has taken possession of the land where it has been planted, further cultivation is limited to removing the netting and frequent watering during the hot summer months. Only a certain number of strawberry plants are allowed to produce nets, in proportion to the quantity of plants presumed to be needed. A good field of remontant strawberry plants lasts three years in good conditions; it should be removed and renewed in the fourth year, on another part of the garden. In recent years, Parisian horticulture has introduced the following procedure for growing repeat strawberries. In June, when the strawberries are fully ripe, we harvest the ripest strawberries possible from the four seasons, press them without crushing them, and leave them exposed to the sun for two hours. After this time, the seed detaches easily; it loses its germinative properties in a very short time, and must be sown immediately. For this purpose, prepare a garden bed covered with 5 to 6 cm of good crumbled potting soil; the strawberry seed is spread over the potting soil without being buried. The seedling is covered with broken branches, over which a light blanket of long straw is spread. The water, sifted through the straw and undergrowth, moistens the seedlings sufficiently, without compressing the potting soil; this is an essential condition for success. The seedling, uncovered as soon as it has sprouted, is transplanted in staggered rows, 30 cm apart in all directions, into good garden soil, smoked in the spring for another crop. It soon starts to grow, flower and produce runners in all directions. Flowers and runners are removed as they appear. Strawberry beds are given a good hoeing before winter, and a few centimetres of good potting soil are spread on top to prevent them from heaving. In spring, strawberry plants are mulched with long litter, and watered generously, taking care to remove any netting or runners. Strawberry plants treated in this way and watered generously, whether it rains or not (this point is very important), flower and bear fruit without interruption, from May to November. Re-sowable strawberry plants should only be required to produce for one year, and the seedlings should be renewed every year, if the plant is not to degenerate; in this way, the strawberry field is maintained at maximum production, and the best strawberries that can be obtained in the kitchen garden are harvested in abundance.  Non-remontant strawberry plants. Non-remontant strawberry plants do not occupy a large place in the market garden; their large-scale cultivation is more profitable in the open field, where they thrive without watering or delicate cultivation care, due to their great hardiness. The plant, prepared in the same way as for remontant strawberries, is placed 30 or 40 centimetres apart in all directions, depending on the presumed size of the clumps. Flowering and fruit ripening precede the period of extreme heat and drought, so that lack of watering does not harm strawberry production. Once this time has passed, the strawberry field is cleared of superfluous runners several times during the summer, requiring no further work. The strawberry crop is small in the first year, very bountiful in the second and third, and small in the fourth, after which the field must be renewed. The market gardener grows only a few of the most sought-after non-remontant strawberry species, not so much for the sale of the fruit as for the plant, which lovers of choice varieties will gladly pay a good price for. One piece of information that may be of value to gout sufferers is that they can be, if not radically cured, at least very sensibly relieved, by eating strawberries at discretion throughout the fine season, and by making use of strawberry jam during the part of the year when there are no fresh strawberries. Forced strawberry cultivation. Forced cultivation of both remontant and non-remontant strawberry plants means that strawberries can be harvested just about every day of the year. The proof is in the fact that at the English court, as at that of the King of the Belgians, a dish of strawberries must be served for dessert in every season. Open-air strawberry cultivation produces ripe strawberries from June to October, and strawberries can be harvested as early as the first days of May, without any care other than covering the strawberry beds with frames supported by trunks during the bad season, and planting stakes behind the trunks supporting suspended straw mats forming a temporary espalier. Under the protection of this espalier, the well-watered strawberry plants flower early, and the ripening of their strawberries is twenty to thirty days ahead of the usual ripening of the same fruit in the open air. The problem to be solved is to grow ripe strawberries by forced cultivation, from November to May. For this purpose, strawberry plants are potted early in March, and the flowering stems and runners are removed throughout the summer as they appear. In October, the potted strawberry plants are placed under frames whose trunks are surrounded by highly compressed fermenting manure. The heat produced by the manure inside the frames causes the strawberry plants to bloom, producing strawberries in November and December. These strawberries are never very abundant, nor are they of very good quality; for, if it is possible to preserve them from the cold, it is not possible to provide them with sunshine in foggy and cold rainy weather; but in the end, a few passable strawberries are harvested, and there are always wealthy amateurs willing to pay a decent price for them. If you're going to grow strawberries on a large scale, you'll need to stock up in March and April with remontant strawberry plants, potted and treated in summer as described above. These strawberry plants are successively introduced into the pineapple greenhouse, or into vine-forcing tarpaulins, where they flower and produce ripe strawberries from January to April. Around Paris, market gardeners who specialize in the forced cultivation of strawberry plants are beginning to use the boiling water heating system known as the thermosyphon. The thermosyphon pipes run underground through a series of boxes covered with glass frames, under which artificial heat, graduated at will, makes the potted strawberry plants blossom and bear fruit all winter long. They are usually kept at a temperature of 10 to 12 degrees until flowering, rising to 15 or 20 degrees when the fruit ripens. During the time that potted strawberry plants spend under heated frames or in the greenhouse, they should be watered three times a day with water brought up to the temperature of the interior of the greenhouse. If they were to be watered with cold water, their vegetation would stall, and the success of forced strawberry cultivation would be compromised. Tomatoes. In the south of France, tomatoes are grown in large quantities; they are eaten sliced and seasoned in oil, pan-fried, with lots of onions. In the rest of France, tomato cultivation is less widespread, because near the big cities, where tomato sales are assured, this branch of cultivation, proportionate to the ease of selling the produce, is as advantageous as any other. Only two varieties of tomato are grown in the market garden, one with red fruit, the other with yellow fruit, both of the same temperament and suitable for the same uses. The red variety deserves preference, as it is easier to place. No vegetable is more sensitive to cold than the tomato. The seed can only be sown in the open ground in the first half of May; seedlings sown at this time are planted in June; they begin to flower in July and bear ripe fruit in September. This is the simplest way to grow tomatoes in all departments south of the Seine valley. North of this valley, and even in the climate of Paris, it's best to sow tomato seeds on warm soil, in February and March. It is not necessary to set up special beds for tomato seed sowing; tomato seed sowing can be done around the edges of melon beds; the plant is removed and put in place before the time when its proximity could disturb the melons. To speed up the growth of tomato plants transplanted into the open air, they are given the protection of a temporary espalier of straw mats supported by stakes, under the shelter of which the tomatoes flower early and bear ripe fruit in July and August; Those tomatoes that appear first on the market are always better sold than the others. When the plants are well loaded with fruit that has reached almost its normal volume, but is still green, the ends of the stems are pinched off, which, left to their own devices, would continue to elongate and flower; but the late-forming tomatoes would not reach maturity before the first cold spells, so there is no reason to regret their removal, which causes the sap to flow back onto the tomatoes from the first flowers. These tomatoes gain in volume, quality and earliness by pruning the ends of the stems that bear them. If you stretch a piece of wire or simple string over the stakes to which the straw mats are attached, the fruit-laden tomato stems can be palmed on these supports, allowing them to benefit more fully from the warmth of the espalier. When the first white frost catches tomatoes with half-ripe fruit, the fruit should not be considered lost. By placing them on a shelf in a well-heated kitchen for a few days, they can be turned into color. These tomatoes are just as good for cooking as the others, although they don't look quite as good. Melon. Few fruits are more pleasant and fragrant than the melon; and although this fruit can give fever to those who eat it excessively, it has no harmful properties for those who use it in moderation; its refreshing properties are even useful for health during hot weather. Cultivation in Europe has produced a multitude of melon varieties, the most esteemed of which are the early but not very large Carmelite black melon, the small Prescott, the common cantaloupe and the Portuguese cantaloupe. In France, the cultivation of the brodé melon, once known as the melon maraîcher par excellence, has more or less been abandoned because of its obvious inferiority to the preceding varieties. The lines of the old poet Lamonnoye are well known: G Les amis de l'heure présente Sont d'un naturel de melon: G Il faut goûter plus de trente Avant que d'en trouver un bon. D These verses applied to embroidered melons; they no longer make sense since only the good varieties are cultivated; today, it's the bad melons that are rare, as they no longer dare show themselves alongside the good ones on the markets, where they would find no buyers. Only one variety of embroidered melon, the Honfleur melon, very large and elongated, is still grown in large quantities in part of the Seine-Inférieure region, for export to England, where it is highly prized. From the Loire Valley onwards, our southern départements have their own local varieties of melon, grown in the open air with no more care than common vegetables, and sold at very low prices; they are mostly edible, but mediocre. Among the best is the sucré vert d'Angers, which is very good, but so small that it cannot be grown in a market garden. The cultivation of melons is not, as has long been repeated, a learned and difficult task, in which only the most skilled 9 gardeners can hope to succeed; on the contrary, it is easy and a sure success for anyone who practises it methodically and without carelessness: this is the most important point. As sensitive to the slightest cold as the tomato itself, the melon can only be grown in the open air between the time when it no longer freezes and the time when it does not yet freeze. This method of cultivating melons is not used by market gardeners in the Paris climate, because it offers too few favorable chances. A melon seed sown around the 10th of May produces a plant that flowers late, and can only ripen fruit in September and October. If the late-season heat fails, which is not uncommon, it ripens only imperfectly. In any case, melons grown in the open air only reach the market in autumn, the time of year when they are least sought-after and least profitable to sell. For all these reasons, the market gardener always starts growing melons on a warm bed, and continues under cloche or chassis, with the dual aim of having perfectly ripe melons and bringing them to market at the time when they sell best. The first seedlings are sown in January, on a warm layer of leaves, horse manure and tannin; these substances must be used in equal parts, moderately moistened, exactly mixed and well trampled into the pit, surrounded by its frame and topped by its glass sash. Melon seeds are not sown until the heat of the bed, covered with a decimeter of potting soil, has dropped to 20 or 25 degrees. Seedlings are best sown in pots rather than in the potting soil; the reason for this lies in the temperament of the plant. The melon suffers very little from transplanting, even when it is done with the greatest possible care and precaution. If it is sown in a pot, when the roots have developed too much to find enough food in the pot soil, it can be removed and placed in the potting soil, without causing any disturbance to its roots, and without producing a halt in the progress of its vegetation. Melon seed is sown in pots filled with potting soil and buried in the bed, not all at once, but in January, February and March, so as to harvest a succession of ripe melons from the first half of June to August. The market gardener takes care to set up a number of layers similar to those for seedlings, in proportion to the number of melon plants he intends to grow, calculating on the basis of one square meter of layer surface for each melon plant. To raise the seedlings from the March sowing, he can also set up a few layers in the open air, at the foot of a wall facing south; the melons will ripen their fruit there before the end of August under glass cloches known as melon cloches; but cloche melons are never as good as frame melons. Once the melon seed has risen in the pots, a little air and as much light as possible are given, whenever the weather allows the frames to be uncovered and half-opened, to prevent the young plant from melting, i.e. from perishing by shrivelling, a kind of accident that frequently takes a part of it away through no fault of the gardener, when the rigors of the cold thwart his operations. Soon the melon plant has taken on four leaves, and it's time to pinch it. This is the beginning of melon pruning, a delicate operation whose principles must be understood if it is to be carried out with discernment. If the melon is allowed to follow its natural growth path, it will produce a single, very long, sparsely-branched stem, the ends of which alone will bear female flowers, called meshes by gardeners, and destined to become melons. The number of meshes will be very limited, and they will be born very far from the root collar of the plant. Experience shows that the closer a melon is born to the collar, the better it is; it also teaches that the most perfect in shape are always the best. What, then, is the purpose of melon pruning? Firstly, to force it to produce a large number of shoots, so as to have a good number of meshes to choose from, and to be able to reserve fruits of the most regular shape, according to their species; secondly, to obtain the meshes on short stems, so that the fruits are as close as possible to the plant's collar. Once this point has been clarified, melon pruning can be practised successfully by the first-comer. The first pinch gives rise to two shoots which, pinched in turn when they have four leaves, each give rise to two others. These, pinched later, bring to eight the number of stalks on which meshes soon appear. The young fruits are allowed to grow large enough to allow us to judge their future; we then choose, with full knowledge of the facts, the two most beautiful; all the others are removed along with the stems bearing them. The surface of the bed is then covered with fresh straw or long litter, to prepare a clean, suitable bed for the melons, which grow rapidly from this point onwards. While they are growing, they should be watered often, but not too much at a time. In terms of pruning and watering, bell-grown melons are treated in the same way as frame-grown melons. Cucumbers. G Cucumbers, which are widely used in English cuisine and in several parts of Germany, are much less common in French cuisine. In Paris, cucumbers, which are brought to the markets in fairly large quantities, are almost all bought by the kitchens of hotels where English and Germans stay. Cucumbers are as sensitive to cold as melons, and can only be sown outdoors from May 10 to 15. Cucumbers are planted in beds one meter 30 centimeters wide, separated by service paths. In the center of each bed, holes 30 centimeters in diameter and 30 centimeters deep are opened. These holes are placed in rows, 80 centimetres apart; they are filled with half-consumed manure, which is covered with a decimetre of soil mixed with good loam in equal parts. The cucumber seeds, two of which are sown in each hole, sprout after a few days. The plant is pinched a first time to make it branch out; the branches produced by the first pinch are pinched in their turn absolutely like those of melons grown in the open air; for the two plants have the same temperament, and their vegetation follows the same course. When the fruit is well formed, in numbers proportionate to the vigor of the plants, the stems above the fruit are removed, and as they form, the subsequent shoots, whose growth would be detrimental to the fruit's enlargement, are cut off. Cucumbers require continual watering throughout the growing season, and the larger and better the plants are watered, the bigger and better the fruit. The small-fruited cucumber, known as gherkin, is grown in exactly the same way. The fruit is picked as soon as it has reached the size of a little finger, and sold for pickling in vinegar, one of the most popular seasonings in French cuisine. The many varieties of cucumber grown by English, Dutch, Belgian and German gardeners are scarcely known in France; in our market gardens, only the early Dutch cucumber, the early white cucumber, the Bonneuil white cucumber and the green gherkin are generally grown; the latter is the most profitable of all cucumbers. All cucumbers can be grown on beds and subjected to the same pruning and cultivation methods as forced melons; but in France, even in the vicinity of large cities, forced cucumbers on beds can rarely fetch prices that cover cultivation costs. The market gardener must be guided in this respect by the general rule, which prescribes that he should produce only what he is assured in advance of being able to sell easily and at a profit. Pumpkin. In France, pumpkins are widely consumed. For a long time, only the large common pumpkin was grown, with its enormous volume, empty interior and consequent susceptibility to mildew. For some years now, the variety known as the Siam ball has been preferred, with its flattened shape, thick flesh and almost no hollow inside, as good quality as the common species and easier to store, and the green-skinned Hungarian pumpkin, whose shape and properties are more or less the same as those of the Siam ball. All pumpkin species are as sensitive to cold as melons and cucumbers; they can only be sown outdoors from May 10 to 15. For this purpose, holes one metre in diameter and 50 centimetres deep are opened, filled with good manure and covered with one decimetre of good soil mixed with loam. Each similar hole is planted with three pumpkin seeds, which soon sprout: as soon as the plant has sprouted its first leaves, it needs copious watering. The stems of pumpkins are not pruned; they grow long and creep along the ground, where they sink hooks that act as roots and contribute to the plant's nourishment. The male flowers appear first at the bottom of the stems, followed by the mesh or female flowers at the top. Pumpkins continue to be watered generously, as the fruit swells visibly; stems that continue to elongate are trimmed to two or three leaves above the fruit. Pumpkins harvested in autumn, before the frosts, keep very well in a dry place away from the cold. Giraumon or Turkish bonnet is also grown in the same way. Its fruit is not very large, but very sweet and has a very delicate flavor. The same method of cultivation is also used for various species of edible squash, the best of which is the marrow squash, with small but very nourishing fruit. Picked just before ripening, this squash's numerous fruits can be seasoned in all sorts of ways. This vegetable is widely used in England, but not in France. The market gardener should only cultivate squash other than pumpkins, which are always in demand, when he is certain that the produce will find buyers. G IVth SECTION. ROOT VEGETABLES. Root vegetables are an important part of the diet; the cultivation of many of these vegetables is of great importance to the market gardener, who must supply city markets with them at all seasons, and who can count on the products of this branch of his industry being placed on good terms; the ease with which root vegetables can be preserved makes their sale especially advantageous in winter, when fresh vegetables become scarce. Root vegetables used in market gardening are: 1° carrots, 2° turnips, 3° radishes, 4° parsnips, 5° salsify, 6° potatoes, 7° Jerusalem artichokes. Root crops used in market gardening include carrots, turnips, radishes, parsnips, salsify, potatoes and Jerusalem artichokes. Bulbous vegetables are also included in this section, although bulbs are not strictly speaking roots, but buds from which true roots grow. These plants, which are as widely used and as necessary as seasoning as the other vegetables, are: onions, leeks, spring onions, garlic and shallots. §6 - Carrot. I G The origin of the carrot is not in doubt; the irrefutably authentic experiments carried out by M. Vilmorin have proved that, subjected to the care of market gardening, the carrot, found everywhere in the wild in Europe, reproduces the cultivated carrot within two generations. G Among the varieties of carrot produced by cultivation, none of which constitutes a distinct species, botanically speaking, the most voluminous belong to field cultivation, and are grown only for cattle feed; these carrots do not belong to market gardening. The varieties permitted in the 5. market garden are: 1° the early short carrot, known as the Holland spinach; 2° the Meaux carrot, red and half-long; 3° the yellow Flanders carrot; 4° the yellow Achicourt carrot; the red Alteringham carrot. The last three are equally suitable for human and animal consumption. Any good garden soil, provided it is not too strong, is suitable for carrots; they should not be sown on fresh fermenting manure, as this type of manuring causes the carrot to branch out in the ground, which deprives it of all its market value. Sowing on land that has been fertilized for another crop the previous year is best. Although the practice of broadcasting carrot seed is more generally followed, it is better to sow the seed very lightly, in rows spaced 20 to 25 centimetres apart. This arrangement allows the young carrot plant to be hoeed two or three times, which is particularly conducive to rapid root formation. The plant should be thinned out as soon as the carrots are the size of a little finger: in this state, they are a healthy, highly sought-after vegetable; those that are to acquire their full volume remain spaced 8 or 10 centimetres apart in the rows. In the Paris climate, early carrots can be sown as early as the end of February, or in the first fortnight of March at the latest. Sowing can be repeated in July; provided the young plant is sufficiently watered, carrots have time to acquire the natural volume of their variety before the first cold spells, to which, moreover, they are not very sensitive; this is an advantageous way for the market gardener to use land on which he has harvested spring vegetables. During the first period of its growth, the carrot's main enemy is a spider-like insect, the theridion, which bites young plants at the root collar to suck out their sweet sap, and kills them. The most economical way to get rid of the spider mite is to sprinkle powdered soot on carrot beds infested with the spider mite, and water thoroughly immediately afterwards. You can also use a strong infusion of corporal tobacco, poured over the carrots in the form of rain, with a watering can with a sheaf pierced with very fine holes; this last method is the safest, but as it is also the most expensive, it is only used in very small-scale cultivation. Near large towns, it is highly advantageous to force early carrots onto warm layers, mounted successively in the manner indicated for melon layers (page 74). These layers should be filled to 35 to 40 centimetres with a mixture of good soil and loam in equal parts, into which the carrot seed is sown; otherwise, as the carrots lengthen, they will encounter the manure in the layer, and this alone will compromise the success of this crop. Carrot seed is sown on the bed from December to March, from month to month; the carrots are harvested successively when they are about half their size; they are much sought-after and a good loss until the time of year when the first peas and other fresh vegetables abound on the markets. Carrots grown on a bed under a frame are very prone to sunburn, especially in March: rolled mats should always be kept within reach of the frame, and thrown over the windows as soon as it gets a little hot in the middle of the day. Carrots forced onto a bed should only be watered very sparingly, and only when absolutely necessary; in most cases, evaporation of moisture from the manure through the bed is sufficient. Turnips. Turnips are more suited to large-scale cultivation than to market gardening; however, three types of turnip are sown in the market garden: the long white turnip from Clairefontaine, the yellow turnip from Freneuse, and the small Nankin turnip from Finland. The cultivation of all these varieties is the same: the seed can be broadcast in spring, or sown in July and August. The latter is the most common time of year. Turnips should be lighted early; if they are too close together, and get in each other's way, they won't form roots, and will grow too much foliage. Garden turnips should only be grown in light, sandy soils; in very fertile fat soils, suitable for all other vegetable crops, turnips grow entirely in leaves; they have difficulty forming roots, which have neither their normal volume, nor the recommendable properties of their variety. In any case, it is one of the least sought-after and least expensive vegetables, so it should be given very limited space in the market garden. Radishes. There's nothing simpler than growing radishes, of which there are three good varieties: pink, white and yellow. The pink variety is the most widely adopted; we've given up on the petite rave, whose two varieties, one pink, the other purple, were very popular in France half a century ago. Radish is sown in a bed in the open air from the first days of March to the end of June; sowing can be repeated in autumn; it takes no more than 20 to 25 days for the radish to take on its normal volume from the moment the seed has emerged. It is essential to interrupt radish cultivation during the hottest part of the summer; at this time of year, despite abundant watering, you would only obtain radishes that are split at the bottom, hollow inside, hard and barely edible. In winter, radishes sown on a bed at the same time as lettuce plants produce produce that is always easy to sell at this time of year. Radishes, whether grown on a bed or in the ground, require a lot of potting soil and a lot of water; the products of this crop are of little value, but there are none in the market garden that can be obtained with less trouble and expense and in a shorter time. In most of France, the use of this root is limited to enhancing the flavour of broth in the traditional pot-au-feu. Only in a few northern cantons is the parsnip grown on a large enough scale to be delivered to the kitchen as a fresh vegetable, when it has reached about a third of its normal volume. There are two species, one short-rooted, suitable for vegetable gardens with shallow soil, the other long-rooted, which thrives only in soil that can be penetrated to a great depth. Parsnip seed is rather difficult to sow, because of the membrane that surrounds it; the best way to sow this seed is to spread it very thinly in rows spaced 20 centimetres apart. Later, the seedling is thinned out at a very young age, so that it is spaced at 20 centimetres in all directions. To ensure even sowing, the seed is covered with crumbled earth, or better still, potting soil, without using a rake to bury it. The surplus from parsnip cultivation is the same as for carrots. Parsnips grown to be eaten at a third of their growth are called sugar carrots by gardeners in Northern and Walloon Belgium; steamed, this root is a hot dish, with a very pronounced flavor, difficult to accept by consumers who are not used to it. Parsnips are the hardiest of root vegetables, and are not damaged by the cold of our harshest winters. Seedlings can also be sown in the spring; the produce from autumn sowing is available early in the summer; those from spring sowing can only be harvested in the off-season; they are reserved for winter supply. For, although parsnip consumption is never very substantial, it is nevertheless one of the root vegetables that the market gardener must be able to supply to his customers in every season. Scorzonera. In French kitchens, the scorsonera has almost universally dethroned its rival and close relative, the salsify, which has the same flavour and eating properties. Salsify is hardly ever grown in market gardens any more; in fact, its cultivation is very similar to that of the scorsonera. Like parsnips, salsify is completely insensitive to the effects of cold; so, without compromising the success of this crop, salsify seed can be sown in September, in deep, light soil, smoked in the spring for another crop. In this case, the plant occupies the soil for the whole of the following year's fine season, and produces roots that can be harvested as it enters its second winter. You can then uproot part of it and store it in the cellar, so as not to run out during hard frosts, and leave the rest in the ground, as the most intense cold has no effect on these roots. When scorsonera seed is sown in spring, in March or April, the roots have not yet reached their normal volume by the time winter sets in, and need another year of cultivation before they can be pulled out. Scorzonera and salsify show a phenomenon in their vegetation that is not reproduced in the vegetation of any other vegetable. These plants, from seed sown in spring, flower and bear seed during the autumn of their first year; the stems are cut to harvest the seed; the plants grow back in spring, flower and bear seed a second time, and their roots, now as large and long as they can be, have lost none of their nutritional properties. Other root vegetables, such as carrots, parsnips and turnips, become woody and no longer edible as soon as they go to seed. Scorzonera seed should be sown very close together, either in spring or autumn, because it never lifts more than partially, as fertilization of the flowers is often incomplete. The seed is broadcast on the ground, divided into plots separated by paths, and covered with a little soil taken from the same paths. This is one of the vegetable seeds most eagerly eaten by wild birds; to prevent their depredations, it's a good idea to hang scarecrows made of feathers planted in a piece of cork over the boards sown with scorsonera seed. Once the plant is well established, it requires no more care than weeding and a little watering in the event of prolonged drought. Potatoes. The potato is only used for early market gardening, so only the earliest varieties are planted, such as marjolin, chaville, shaw, and the two Belgian varieties known as sept semaines and neuf semaines, because of their rapid vegetation. To make them even more precocious, before winter the tubers intended for planting are exposed to the action of air and light, in a well-ventilated and above all well-lit room; in a short time, if care is taken to turn them over often and to open the windows as long as it doesn't freeze, the potatoes turn green on all their surfaces, and lose their eating properties. But instead of exhausting themselves by producing long, etiolated shoots, like those kept in a dark cellar, green potatoes develop short, vigorous, well-colored eyes. In January, we arrange them close together in flat baskets, and occasionally light a little fire in the room, so that the potato sprouts develop quickly, along with their rudimentary roots. In February, either in the middle or at the end of the month, depending on the state of the weather, the potatoes are put in place in the usual way, taking every precaution not to break either the stems or the roots. The tubers are harvested in May and June, when they are about two-thirds full. This crop would be too unproductive on its own to take its place in the market garden, if it didn't fit perfectly into a system of other crops, by means of what market gardeners call counter-planting. As soon as the early potatoes have been ridged, a cabbage, cauliflower or celery plant is planted in the gaps between the rows, having been prepared in advance. When the cabbages, cauliflowers or celery are ready for market, the land is planted with spinach or escarole, plants for which there is still enough of the summer left, and which can be harvested before the first serious cold weather arrives. Without this possibility of counterplanting the land occupied by early potatoes, this plant would never feature in the market garden. Jerusalem artichoke. If there is a poorly exposed corner of the market garden where the soil can only be raised to the same level of fertility with difficulty as the rest of the plot, this is the place for Jerusalem artichokes. Because of the strength of their stems and the breadth of their foliage, Jerusalem artichokes, planted in thick, tight rows, are eminently suitable for use as windbreaks. Planted in mediocre soil, they separate completely from the soil and are usually planted at the same distance as potatoes. However, if you intend to form a curtain of Jerusalem artichokes that will act as a shelter against strong winds, plant them in two or three parallel rows, one decimetre apart in all directions. The largest tubers can be cut, taking the precaution, as with large potatoes, of cutting them in advance and leaving the cuttings to dry out in the open air for two or three days before planting. The Jerusalem artichoke, although native to South America, does not freeze in the ground, even during the harshest winters in the climate of central France; the tubers can be left in the ground after the stems have been cut off towards the end of autumn, and the Jerusalem artichokes can be harvested only in proportion to consumption needs, which avoids any embarrassment in preserving them. When Jerusalem artichokes have been planted in a corner of the market garden, either in rows or in beds, it is almost never necessary to renew the planting; the tuber fragments that remain in the ground, having escaped uprooting, are sufficient for reproduction, so that you will always find roughly the same quantity to harvest every year, where they have been planted once. Bulbous vegetables. - Onions. Among the bulbous plants permitted in the market garden, the onion ranks first. Consumption of this plant is considerable in France, either for cooking, or for the preparation of burnt onions, intended to give at the same time a good taste and a beautiful color to fatty broth. Three main varieties of onion are grown: yellow, white and violet; yellow is the most widely used. Onion seed is sown in spring, in March and April, without manure, but with a good covering of compost. An onion sown on recent manure would grow all leafy; it would turn with difficulty, split in two, and the bulb harvest would be almost nil. When the young plant is well established, weed it, then thin it out, so that each plant has enough space to acquire its normal volume. Parisian market gardeners follow an excellent method in this respect: they sow onion seed and leek seed in equal parts. After an initial weeding, they let the young onion and leek plants grow together, until the latter is strong enough to be transplanted. Pulling out the leek starts to release the young onions, which are left to grow for a further two or three weeks. The bulbs are now about the size of a thumb; if further thinning is necessary, some are removed and sold fresh in bunches to season peas. The remaining ones, spaced sufficiently far apart, grow rapidly. Bulb formation is encouraged by twisting the leaves without detaching them. Onions can be harvested as soon as the leaves begin to yellow and fade, a sure sign that the bulbs will no longer grow. Onions are usually sorted into three sizes, and stored in a dry, frost-free place, but cool rather than too hot. A temperature that is a little too high encourages the onion's natural tendency to vegetate in spring, making it unsuitable for use as a seasoning. In the vicinity of Paris and other large cities, many white onion seeds are sown under the conditions described above; these onions are harvested when they have reached about two-thirds of the volume of their species. Being more precocious than the others, the white onion easily reaches half-ripeness at the time when the supply of yellow onions from the previous harvest is exhausted, which ensures its sale at advantageous prices. A few years ago, Mr. Nouvellon's method for growing onions was highly recommended. It consists of sowing the onion seed very close together in autumn, in a bed lined with potting soil. Once the plant has emerged from the soil, it is left to suffer from drought; the leaves soon wither, and the onions, which are very well formed, are no bigger than peas. They are pulled up in this state and kept dry for the following year's planting. In spring, they are planted in rows, 6 or 8 centimetres apart in all directions. The advantages of this method are that it spares the seed and produces onions of roughly the same size, but it is too labor-intensive for large-scale cultivation at a time of year when the market gardener is overloaded with work. Nouvellon's onion-growing method is not widely used, but it is suitable for small-scale cultivation when a moderate quantity of very fine onions is desired, without mixing in small ones. Leek. Although less common than onions, leeks are indispensable, if only as an accompaniment to stews. Leek seed is sown in nurseries, either alone or, as mentioned above, mixed with onion seed. Two species are accepted for market gardening: the long common leek and the large short Rouen leek. The plant is placed in rows, 5 to 7 centimetres apart in all directions; recovery is assured, provided the plant has been well dressed, as the saying goes, i.e. provided the tops of the leaves and about half the length of the roots have been removed. You mustn't sow all the leek seed at once, so as to have a good plant to put in place twice, in May and June. Leeks transplanted early should be cut in late autumn and early winter; if kept later, they will not freeze, as the cold has no effect on this plant; but they will come up and form flower stalks very early in the spring, which deprives them of their nutritional properties. However, there is always a period in spring and early summer when leeks are in short supply on the market, because the previous year's leeks have all come up, and the new crop has not yet reached its normal size. This disadvantage can be partially overcome by sowing a small amount of leek seed at the beginning of September; these late sowings must be very light. The plant is weeded and thinned out when it is deemed too thick. It thus spends the winter without being transplanted, and never becomes very large; but in the spring of the following year, it does not come up until much later than the others, so that it supplies the market until those transplanted first in the spring are ready for sale. Ciboule. Less common than leeks, chives are nonetheless useful enough as a seasoning for a host of dishes to make their cultivation indispensable in the market garden. Chives are sown in March under the same conditions as leeks; the seedling is transplanted when it is the size of a feather pipe; it is planted in rows, at a distance of at least 15 cm in all directions, because each plant forms a thick clump, so that the whole plot is covered. Chives are only used fresh, like leeks; although they are closely related to onions, they cannot be harvested and dried as a winter supply. In July, a second seedling of chives is sown; the plant, with a light covering of dry leaves or long litter, overwinters well in the Paris climate; it is put into place very early in the spring; it produces good clumps for sale long before those from the spring seedlings. We also have a variety of perennial spring onion that can be planted as a border around vegetable garden squares; once in place, it requires no cultivation care other than splitting the clumps to deliver a portion for consumption when they become too thick. Garlic. Garlic can only be grown successfully in light, rich, dry soil; if the plant suffers from excess humidity, it rots on the spot. Although garlic can flower and ripen its seed in the climate of the departments south of the Loire, garlic seed is never sown; the plant is multiplied by its very numerous cloves, wrapped in a common menbrane or tunic, which must not be removed until it is time to use them, either for cooking or for planting. Garlic cloves planted in rows, 8 or 10 centimetres apart, either in beds or in borders, only need to be weeded a few times. When the leaves turn yellow, it's time to pull out the garlic; it should remain on the ground for a few days, exposed to the air and sun; then it should be tied in bundles and hung in a dry place. Garlic is grown on a large scale only in the market gardens of our southern départements, where garlic is used in all dishes; it is also processed on a fairly large scale in the canton of Roscoff (Finistère), which supplies Paris. Shallots. Shallots, of which there are two known varieties, large and small, are grown in the same way as garlic, and thrive in the same soil. Shallot seed is not sown; it multiplies exclusively by dividing its cloves. Shallots vegetate very quickly; planted in March, they can be harvested as early as the end of May and in the course of June. When planting, care must be taken not to bury the shallot pods too deeply, as at least half of them must remain above ground. Without this precaution, they will rot on the spot, even when the soil is dry and it doesn't rain more than usual. Shallots are the most aromatic of the bulbous vegetable plants used in French cuisine as a seasoning; a very small quantity of chopped shallot adds a very strong flavor to a host of dishes; it does not have the disadvantage of garlic, whose flavor is so persistent that anyone who has eaten a dish heavily seasoned with garlic is sure to experience the same sensation as if he or she had eaten garlic continuously for several days in a row. Shallots, provided they are grown in soil that is perfectly free of humidity, do very well in the Paris climate, and can even be successfully cultivated north of the Seine valley. - SECTION. CULTIVATION OF SEED-BEARING PLANTS. § 7 - Double scale. The success of all branches of market gardening, even when carried out with the utmost care, can be compromised when poor quality seeds are sown, and it is not always possible to obtain good quality seeds commercially. It is therefore of the utmost importance to know how to cultivate seed-bearing plants properly, and to harvest the seeds of all kinds of vegetable plants in the best possible conditions. The best method for this special type of cultivation is that practised from time immemorial by gardeners in the Nancy area (Meurthe), under the name of "double-scale": here's what it consists of: first, the most beautiful specimens of each type of plant are chosen and cultivated as best as possible, and the seed is harvested and carefully sorted. This seed, already very good in itself, is not sold; it is sown separately in the best soil, with the richest fertilizer, and only the seed from this second generation is sold. It is on this method, practised with rare intelligence, that the reputation of Nancy's gardeners rests for the production of vegetable seeds; they supply all our eastern departments. It would be difficult to do better, but it is possible to do just as well throughout France, using the same simple process, with certain results and easy execution. In the course of this treatise, we have taken care to note those plants which, in the practice of market gardening, are never multiplied by sowing their seeds, because we have enough other means of propagation for them. The following list includes vegetable plants that can only be propagated by sowing, and for which the market gardener must cultivate the seed-bearing plants himself, if he wants to be sure of harvesting the seed in the best conditions. Bean. Pea. Broad bean. Lentils. Cabbage and cauliflower. Celery. Cardoon. Spinach. Sorrel. Asparagus. Lettuce. Chicory. Artichoke. Strawberry. Melon. Cucumber. Pumpkin. Carrot. Turnip. Radish. Parsnip. Scorsonera. Onions. Leek. Beans. To keep the best types of bean clean and unaltered, you must first isolate those you are planting as seed-bearing plants, i.e. keep them away from other types of bean which flower at the same time, and which could give rise to accidental cross-breeding; it is through the effect of such cross-breeding that, when you are sure you have only sown dwarf white beans, you can harvest variegated ones of various colors, which climb up like Soissons beans. As the pods ripen, they are harvested to keep them whole; the beans should not be shelled until they are planted; the pods that ripen first are always those that provide the most perfect beans of each variety. This care is especially necessary to preserve the purity of early dwarf flageolet beans; their precocity, which is their main merit, can only be preserved when sowing beans from the flowers that bloom first, whose pods often ripen nearly a month before the others. We insist on this point, because it happens quite often that the inexperienced gardener is surprised by the degeneration of his early beans from the second generation; there is no degeneration in the true sense of the word; there is only an omission of the essential care we have just indicated. Peas. The precocity of peas, a quality no less valuable for this vegetable than for beans, can be preserved by taking the same precautions. It is safe to sow very early and very late peas side by side; as they do not flower at the same time, the latter cannot exert any untoward influence on the earliness of the former; it is only necessary to avoid sowing peas of unequal earliness side by side, which flower at the same time. Peas reserved as seed-bearing plants should be topped very early, and the pods of the first flowers harvested as they ripen; this is enough to keep each variety of pea pure, with all the qualities that make it so popular with consumers. Marsh beans and lentils, whose produce is to be reserved for the following year's sowing, should be managed in the same way as peas and beans. The seeds of all vegetable plants in the legume family can retain their germinative powers for several years, but better results are obtained by sowing only the products of the previous harvest, preserved in the pods until the time comes to sow them. D Cabbage and Cauliflower. It is especially with cabbage of all kinds, as well as with cauliflower and broccoli, that it is useful to apply the excellent double-scale method described above (page 98). To obtain good seed from all head cabbages, it is first necessary to separate the seed-bearing plants of each species, as they all flower at the same time in spring, making accidental cross-breeding between neighbors inevitable. At the start of winter, the apples of cabbages that have been carefully marked as the best of each variety are cut off. The 6. cores are left in the place where the plant was transplanted to form the apple. From the first fine days at the end of February, the horizontal cut of each core is split into four by two incisions a few centimetres deep, crossing each other at right angles. This operation has the effect of hastening the growth of young shoots, which each quarter of a core soon produces. If several shoots develop, leave one on each side, so that it can vegetate more vigorously. As soon as the top of each shoot begins to flower, it is pinched back 5 or 6 centimetres, to encourage the growth of flowering side shoots. These in turn are pinched back in the same way when they are well advanced in flowering. This leaves only a small number of siliques on each flowering stalk, filled with the most perfect seeds possible. Cabbages that don't head, such as green cabbages and Brussels sprouts, don't have to undergo quite the same process; the central stem is left to rise after all the sprays, each of which represents a small cabbage head, have been harvested. This stem, when it is ready to flower, is pinched off to a decimetre in length; if the side shoots seem too numerous, part of it is cut off and the others pinched off, always on the principle that the seeds of the side shoots of plants in the Cruciferae family are better than those of the central shoots, and that these seeds are all the better for the fewer siliques left on each branch of the seed-bearers. The same method applies to harvesting the seeds of different varieties of cauliflower. Instead of letting the flowers of the most defective apples, which cannot be sold, rise, as is the vicious custom of many gardeners, the most perfect heads should be reserved for seed-bearing purposes, and, as soon as they flower, they should be summered and treated in the same way as the seed-bearing heads of other cabbage species. These seeds retain their germinative properties for several years; it is the two-year-old seeds that produce the best-formed plants. Celery. 1 It is important to select the most vigorous plants of each celery variety as seedbeds, using the double-scaling method. If, in the usual way, less robust plants are allowed to grow and flower, most of the seed is not fertilized and does not set. Seedbeds planted in deep, rich soil with a southern exposure should be given plenty of water until after flowering. As soon as the seeds are ripe, the stems are cut, bound into bundles and hung in a moisture-free place. When you want to use them for sowing, don't detach them all indiscriminately; those at the outer edges of the umbels are the best fertilized, and almost all of them sprout, whereas those in the center of the umbels, being only imperfectly fertilized, are largely sterile and don't sprout. The same precaution applies to sorting the seeds of all vegetable plants in the Umbelliferes family. Cardoon plants intended for use as seed carriers are planted, smoked and watered in the same way as the others, but care is taken not to bind their leaves and cover them, as is done with those whose etiolated ribs are to be delivered for consumption. As soon as the blossoms are ready to wilt, wrap them in a piece of gauze or very light muslin. Without this precaution, wild birds, particularly goldfinches, which are very fond of cardoon seeds, would devour them without even allowing them to reach full maturity. Spinach. Spinach does not bear seed until its second year; the plant is dioecious, that is, it bears male and female flowers on separate plants; in spinach seedlings whose seed is to be harvested, all the male plants must be kept, even though they cannot bear seed; otherwise, as the female flowers are only imperfectly fertilized, seedlings made with their seeds will grow very unevenly.  Sorrel. One of sorrel's faults is its tendency to grow uninterruptedly throughout the summer, from spring to autumn, so that the gardener is constantly busy cutting back useless flower stalks, which regrow as they are cut; these stalks are picked a little before the seeds are fully ripe, and fall as soon as they are ripe; they are taken to a shed, where the seed finishes ripening; it can then be harvested without loss. Asparagus. To harvest good asparagus seed, stalks laden with ripe berries are left standing until they turn yellow; these berries are not harvested until November, after which the stalks that produced them are cut to ground level. The berries are left to dry on a shelf in a healthy, well-ventilated room. Once they are completely dry, they are soaked in water for twenty-four hours, allowing the softened pulp to detach easily. The seeds, which should be of a nice black color, are washed out and dried in the shade for use in the following year's seedlings. Lettuce. In most lettuce plantations, especially if the soil is naturally dry and not sufficiently watered, there are always too many lettuces rising instead of plucking. If you want the seed to be good, and to produce a plant that's ready to peel well, you mustn't harvest the seed from lettuces that have bolted before they've formed a head. A few of the most beautiful apples of each variety are left to rise and flower, so that the seed can be harvested. Feather scarecrows should be placed near these seedpods to keep out the goldfinches, which are very eager to eat them. Seedbeds of each variety should be planted far enough apart to avoid accidental cross-breeding. Chicory. The seeds of the different varieties of curly endive, escarole and chicory can only be harvested from two-year-old plants, because wild chicory, from which all these varieties originate, is a biennial plant. We choose the most beautiful plants for seedbeds, and avoid tying them to bleach them, as we do with those to be eaten in salads. These plants need to be covered with leaves or dry litter, to protect them from the effects of heavy frosts. As with grainy lettuces, varieties should be carefully isolated to prevent cross-breeding from causing them to degenerate. Artichoke. Artichoke plants used as seedbeds should each retain only the head at the end of the central stem; side shoots and their heads should be removed as they appear. As soon as the flowers begin to fade, wrap them up like cardoon flowers, to protect them from bird damage. Artichoke seedpods should be kept away from cardoon seedpods. Strawberry runners and rooted offshoots of non-spinning varieties are more than sufficient for the propagation of this plant. There would be no point in harvesting the seed if experience had not shown that seedlings are useful for periodically rejuvenating good varieties and preserving all their valuable properties. The best strawberries of each species are left to ripen as fully as possible, then exposed to the sun to dry out completely, allowing the seed to detach easily. They should be sown without delay, as they are one of the quickest to lose their germination capacity. Melon. It is never necessary to cultivate melons separately for use as seed-bearing plants, but it is important to harvest for sowing only the seeds of the most beautiful fruits of each species, taken from a melon plantation where only one variety is grown; this point is very important to avoid failure resulting from degeneration by crossing. Cucumbers. Cucumber and gherkin seeds are only perfectly ripe when the fruit containing them has rotted. A certain number of the finest fruits of each variety should therefore be left to rot on the vine, and the seed separated by washing when the pulp begins to decompose. It is dried in the shade and kept dry for next year's sowing. D Pumpkin. No vegetable plants are more easily altered by crossbreeding than those of the Cucurbitaceae family, pumpkins, gourds and squashes of all kinds. The seed should therefore only be harvested from fruit grown far from plants whose vicinity could have caused them to crossbreed and degenerate. Carrot. The collar of seed-bearing carrots should not be cut off in the same way as carrots stored in cellars or silos. Once the best carrots of each variety have been selected, any leaves other than those in the center are cut off at the start of winter; the carrots are then planted in gauges at the foot of a wall facing south. During frosts, they are covered with leaves or dry litter, and uncovered whenever temperatures permit. In spring, the carrots thus preserved are planted 40 or 50 centimetres apart in all directions, depending on the volume of each variety. When the seed is ripe, the seed-laden stems are cut, bound into bundles and hung in a dry place. At sowing time, carrot seeds are detached from the umbels with the same precautions indicated for sorting celery seeds: if they are detached indiscriminately, you run the risk of sowing seeds, a large proportion of which are not fertilized and do not germinate. D Turnips and radishes. G Seed-bearing turnips and radishes should be chosen from among the best conformed of each species; the seed is more perfect and gives clearer plants when care is taken to head the seed-bearing plants, like those of cabbages, at the beginning of flowering, and to leave only a moderate number of siliques on each seed-bearing plant. Parsnips. E Seed-bearing parsnips are grown in exactly the same way as carrots, and the seeds are removed from the umbels with the same precautions. Scorsonera. D D We have seen (page 87) that scorsonera and salsify flower and bear seed two years in a row, contrary to the way other potaterous plants vegetate, which die after ripening their seed; the seed of these two plants can only be harvested from second-year seed-bearing plants. When harvesting onions, the most beautiful and best-formed of each variety should be set aside as seed carriers. Early in the spring, they are planted in good soil that was smoked the previous year. When the flower stalks, which are hollow and flimsy, begin to elongate, they are tied to stakes to prevent the wind from breaking them before the seed has ripened. When the onion seed is ripe, it forms a spherical bunch at the top of the stems; these bunches are tied into bundles and hung in a dry place; the seed is not peeled until it is time to use it for sowing. D Leek. Leeks go to seed in the spring of their second year. A few of the most vigorous plants are left as seed-bearing stock; their hardy temperament allows them to overwinter in the open air, without any protection. Like onions, flower stalks need to be supported by stakes; the seeds are kept in their capsules; they are only peeled when they are sown. D D FI EI LP Pages. § 1 - General notions................................ Soil selection and preparation....................... Fertilizers and soil improvers......................... § 2 - Equipment......................................... Gardening operations........................... § 3 - Vegetable plants (classification of)................ 1st section. - Edible seed plants........ Beans.............................. ........... Peas............................................. Beans ........................................... Lentil........................................ § 4. 2nd section. - Plants with edible leaves and flowers. Cabbage........................................... Celery........................................... Cardoon.......................................... Rhubarb........................................ Sorrel........................................... Spinach.......................................... Tetragon....................................... Asparagus........................................ Forced asparagus................................. Lettuce.......................................... Lettuce........................................... Chicory......................................... Lamb's lettuce........................................... Rapunzel........................................ Parsley........................................... Chervil.......................................... Tarragon........................................ Civet.......................................... Cauliflower....................................... Artichoke........................................ § 5. - 3rd section. - Edible fruit plants........... Strawberries.......................................... Everbearing strawberries.............................. Non-remontant strawberries......................... Forced strawberry cultivation......................... Tomato.......................................... Melon........................................... ERROOGIO- E 24 C det me . N Mr 62 * ME 72 Cucumber...................................... Pumpkin....................................... § 6 - 4th section. - Root vegetables.................... Carrot.......................................... Turnip.......................................... Radish........................................... Parsnip........................................ Scorsonera..................................... Potato.................................. Jerusalem artichoke.................................... Bulbous vegetables....................... Onion.......................................... Leek.......................................... Chives......................................... Garlic............................................. Shallots....................................... § 7 - 5th section - Seedling cultivation............ Double scale............................ Beans.......................................... Peas, beans and lentils.............................. Cabbage and cauliflower................................ Celery........................................... Cardoon.......................................... Spinach......................................... Sorrel.......................................... Asparagus......................................... 2 79 80 81 84 85 86 - 87 89 90 91 91 94 95 96 97 98 98 99 100 101 103 104 104 104 105 Lettuce........................................... 105 Chicory........................................ Artichoke........................................ Strawberry........................................ Melon.......................................... Cucumber..................................... Pumpkin........................................ Carrot.......................................... Turnip and radish.................................... 106 106 107 107 107 108 108 109 Parsnip.......................................... 109 Scorion and salsify....................... Onion................................... Leek................................ 2 109 110 110 CRICHY. - Impr. de Maurice Loignon et Cie, rue du Bac-d'Asnières, 12. FAMILY STORIES PRECEDED BY A STUDY OF INDUSTRIAL EXHIBITIONS, by Louis FORTOUL. PRINTING. - STATIONERY. - GLASS. - SILK. CLAY. - SALT. -MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. - HIDES AND SKINS. - SUGAR. One heau vol. in-18 jésus, with vignettes in the text. Price, paperback or hardback: 1 fr. 50. LIRE DES D G D SOIRÉES D HIVER TIE S.-H. BERTHOUD. A handsome in-18 volume: 1 fr. 50c. This volume offers a series of readings that are both moral, pleasant and instructive. Indeed, there's no better way to spend a long winter's evening than reading this book, in which the most interesting episodes are recounted in a literary form whose simplicity never excludes elegance. There are nine of these readings, entitled : - L'Ami du chevalier de Forbin; - Histoire de chasses; - Mes Aventures en Perse; - Toby; - Une Reine sans le savoir; - Les Serments de maître Van-Oort; - Le Prix d'une consultation; - Ludolf; - Le Bonheur d'être fou. Some of these stories are historical, which adds to the interest they offer the reader.  1 By M. S. Henry BERTHOUD. 1 VOLUME IN-18. - PRICE: PAPERBACK OR HARDBACK: 1 FRANC 50 CENT. This excellent book is made up of dialogues, in which the author gives his readers a real botany course, and, along the way, gets them interested in his teaching through charming digressions and short stories, which the slightest incident, the simplest observation, raised by one of the interlocutors on stage, naturally provokes. Botany in the Village comprises seventeen chapters, each of which is distinguished by practical interest and usefulness. Here are the titles of these chapters, in the order assigned by the author: - an Encounter; - at the Water's Edge; - the Mushroom Gatherer; - Between the Cup and the Lips; - Some Plant Phenomena; - an Economic Barometer; - Where It's About a Carrot and Many Roses; - The Story of a Rose; - l'Horloge, le Calendrier et le Baromètre de fleurs; - Petit cours de Botanique; - la Graine; - la Végétation; - le Fruit; - le Péricarpe; - Organisation de la plante, sa nutrition et son accroissement; - Nutrition, Respiration et Accroissement des végétaux; - de la Classification; - Conclusion. LES VEILLÉES DE JEAN RUSTIQUE SIMPLES ENTRETIENS SUR LES ANIMAUX UTILES ET NUISIBLES BY J. PIZETTA Author of the Livre populaire d'Histoire naturelle. 1 HANDSOME VOLUME IN-18, DECORATED WITH OVER 100 VIGNETTES. Price: 1 fr. 50 c. CAMPAIGNS D'ITALIE, - D'ÉGYPTE, D'AUTRICHE, - DE RUSSIE, - DE FRANCE - ET DE CRIMÉE BY M. EUGÈNE LOUDUN. A handsome 300-page volume, glossy paper. Price, paperback or hardback. 1 fr. 50. To retrace the imperial epic, both in the period at the beginning of this century and in the contemporary period; to follow, under Napoleon I and Napoleon III, the victorious march of our armies; to uplift souls and refresh virile virtues at the spectacle of these great events: such is the aim of this book, in which we have endeavored to highlight and represent the most dramatic episodes, to report the most sublime words and the most striking traits of courage. At the same time, the movements of armies, campaign plans and military operations are described with the most scrupulous accuracy. This book will therefore be read and understood by everyone: everyone will find in it beautiful models and noble examples. SOUVENIRS DU PREMIER EMPIRE PUBLIÉS By M. KERMOYSAN. A handsome Vol. in-18. - Price, paperback or hardback: 1 fr. 50. This work is of great interest. Indeed, it is less a question here of a new biography or new judgments to be made about the Emperor, than of making him known through the testimony of those who approached him and lived at his side. These memories show him far from the battlefields, surrounded by his family and ministers, encouraging the arts, discussing the articles of his immortal Codes, or presiding over the execution of the immense public works undertaken during his reign. This work thus gives an accurate idea of all that has been written that is most curious and truly worthy of interest about the imperial era. A L'USAGE DES CAMPAGNES by M. le Docteur DESCIEUX. A handsome in-18 volume. Price, paperback or hardback: 1 fr. 25. - LES PÈRES DE L'ÉGLISE CHOIX DE LECTURES MORALES Approuvé par S. E. le Cardinal-Archevêque de Paris, Précédé d'une introduction et accompagné de notes Par M. E. LOUPUN. PRICE, PAPERBACK OR HARDBACK: 1 FR. 50. One could hardly ask for a treatise on morality from purer and higher sources, from writers of greater eloquence and authority. There's no need to insist on the high significance of the writings of the Fathers of the Church; All we can say, by way of simple indication, is that the author of this publication has gathered together in his volume one hundred and twenty-two extracts from these writings, relating to as many different subjects, and due to St. Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian, Origen, Lactantius, St. Basil, St. Ephrem, St. Gregory of Nazianzus, St. Ambrose, St. John Chrysostom, St. Jerome, St. Augustine and so on., etc. D D'HISTOIRE ET DE GEOGRAPHIE Published by Ch. LOUANDRE. A strong vol. in-18 of 500 pages, on two columns, glossy and satin paper. SECOND EDITION, REVISED AND SUPPLEMENTED. Price, hardback or paperback: 4 fr. Easy to consult, abundant in indications of all kinds, but precise in form, concise without obscurity, this Dictionary gives, as one would in conversation, on the various specialties it deals with, an answer that is at once engraved in the memory by definition and analysis. In addition to history and geography, this volume contains numerous bíographic articles and a few archaeological and philological notions. In the historical section, we have focused, for both ancient and modern times, on the essential facts, those most commonly remembered by mankind, and which mark a memorable date in the lives of peoples. Everything to do with France, with its ancient judicial, political and administrative institutions, has been the subject of particular attention and a little more extensive development, and it can be said that the collection of the various articles concerning our glorious homeland forms a substantial summary of its annals. In the geography section, we have always indicated the political changes, the primitive races, the invasions and emigrations, the population figures, the principal dynasties, and the dates of their rise and fall, so that, in this part of the book, statistics and history always complement the geography proper. In the biographical section, we have endeavored to summarize, in a few precise words, the most salient features of the talent or destiny of famous people; and in the articles on sovereigns, the character of their reign and the influence they exerted on the society of their time: we have, moreover, only dealt with the dead, the living not yet belonging to history. Never, we can say without fear of being accused of exaggeration, have a greater number of facts, dates and indications of all kinds been brought together in the same number of pages; never has a book of the same kind presented such conditions of cheapness and typographical elegance. G , 1 DE LA FRANCE PAR MM. HUBAULT Professeur d'histoire au Lycée Louis-le-Grand; MARGUERIN Directeur de l'École municipale Turgo. XVIIe ct XVIIIe siècles. Henri IV and Sully. - Louis XIII and Richelieu. - Louis XIV. - Royalty under Louis XV. - Conditions of the working classes at the death of Louis XV. - Condition of the privileged classes. - The spirit of the 18th century. - Turgot and Malesherbes - Necker's ministry. - The last ministers of the monarchy. - The eve of the Revolution, etc. G D Taking the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries as their starting point, the authors of this book have endeavored above all to present the history of the various classes of French society in the past, and especially the working classes, and to show by comparing the times what new duties are imposed on farmers and workers by the liberal institutions that govern labor today. General education. - People's libraries, periodicals, educational magazines and newspapers. BIBLIOTHÈQUE DES CAMPAGNES Publiée sous le patronage de Son Exc. M. le Ministre de l'Instruction publique et des Cultes et autorisée pour les bibliotheques scolaires. OE UVRES DE NAPOLEON III MÉLANGES. "I address my work to all those who love science and history, these guides in prosperity, these consolers in ill fortune." (Du passé et de l'avenir de l'artillerie.) One volume, English format. - Price: 1 fr. 50 cent. The fragments gathered here are detached from the various writings that make up the four-volume edition of the Œuvres de Napoléon III. This edition could not be placed in modest libraries; we have tried to make a selection from it, so as to form a volume which, while remaining within everyone's reach, would nevertheless enable the reader to conceive a general idea of the work. Above all, it was important to show the august author in those of his works that preceded his advent and, as it were, prepared him : either in exile, spreading Napoleonic ideas, enlightening and popularizing them; or in the depths of his prison, meditating on the power of weapons of war and the secrets of victory; or in the presence of the nation, making it judge his feelings, his struggles, his resolutions, and finally winning it over, in a magnificent sweep, to the program of the new empire. Such was the task we set ourselves, and which we would like to have usefully fulfilled. DES SCIENCES Edited by Messrs BOILLOT, BOULANGER, DUCROS. E. D'ORVAL, FRINN. P. LABITTE, LAGARHIGUE, LÉVY, MARCOTTE, YSABEAU, etc., AND PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF Ch. LOUANDRE Editor-in-chief of the Journal général de l'Instruction publique. Astronomy - Cosmography - Geology - Meteorology Physics - Chemistry - Zoology - Botany - Mineralogy Agriculture - Anatomy - Physiology. A strong English volume. - Price paperback or hardback. 4 fr. G-Executed along the same lines as the Dictionnaire usuel de géographie et d'histoire, we have endeavored in the new Dictionary to present only essential facts, precise notions, simple and clear definitions, and to summarize, in a word, in an elementary form, the most varied notions of science brought up to date with the most recent discoveries. This Dictionary embraces all the cosmological sciences properly speaking, i.e. those whose object is the study of the marvels of creation, of the various elements that constitute it, of the phenomena of which it is the scene, and of the beings that populate it. The framework to be followed was thus clearly defined: it was to include astronomy, cosmography, geology, meteorology, zoology, botany, physics and chemistry. - The visible miracle of the world is the subject of this book. It is not, therefore, aimed at professional scientists, or at any particular speciality; it is addressed to all those whose curiosity is aroused by the spectacle of creation, and who wish to know the most important scientific explanations of the phenomena of nature and life. The Dictionary is preceded by a remarkably precise and accurate Introduction. In it, the author takes a look at the history of the sciences; he establishes their divisions and classifications, and reviews them in the three great periods of antiquity, the Middle Ages and modern times. LIBRARY THE COUNTRYSIDE. - The Victories of the Empire, campaigns in Italy, - Egypt, - Austria. - Prussia. - Russia. - of France. - Crimée, etc., by M. E. Lounux - 1 handsome volume in-18. recommended for current reading in elementary school. Price, paperback or hardback. . . . . . . 1 fr. 50 c. Dictionnaire usuel d'Hlistoire et de Géographie, published by M. Ch. LOUANDRE. -1 large in-18 volume of 500 pages on two columns. Price, paperback or hardback. 4 fr. Dictionnaire usuel des Sciences, published by M. Ch. LoZAxDRE - 1 large two-column in-18 volume. souvenirs du premier Empire, published by M. KERMOYSAN. -- 1 volume in-18. Price, franco, paperback or hardback. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 fr. 50c. Entretiens sur l'hygiènc, à l'usage des campagnes, par M. le Docteur DEScIeUx.-1 beau volume in-18. Price, franco, paperback or hardback. . . . . . . . . . . ... 1 fr. 25c. Les Fères de l'Église. Choix de lectures morales, approuvé par S. E. Mgr. le Cardinal-Archevêque de Paris, precédé d'u. introduction et accompagné de notes, par M. E. LouDUx. Price, franco, paperback or hardback. . . . . . . . . . 1 fr. 50c. L'industrie moderne. Récits familiers, précédés d'une étude sur les expositions industrielles, by Louis FORTOUL. - 1 handsome volume in-18 jesus, with vignettes. Price, paperback or hardback. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 1 fr. 500. Cours d'Agriculture pratique, par une Société de cultivateurs, published under the direction of M. YSABEAU, agronomist. editor of the agricultural section of the Journal des Instituteurs - 4 volumes in-18 jésus, with numerous figures in the text. Price, franco. . . . . . . . . . . . .. 6 fr. La Botanique au village, by M. S. Henry BerTHoup - 1 voiume in-18. Price, paperback or hardback. . . 1 fr. 500 G A series of practical works on everyday science and technology will shortly be published in the same collection. Gucuv - Impr. de Maurice Le gron et Cie, rue du Bac-d'Asnibros, 12. 7531 63030